Fly fish is an angl method in which an artifici "fly" is us to catch fish. The fly is cast us a fly rod, reel, and special weight line. Cast a nearli weightless fly or "lure" requir cast techniqu significantli differ from other form of casting. Fly fishermen us hand ti fli that resembl natur invertebrates, baitfish, other food organisms, or "lures" to provok the fish to strike (bite at the fly). Fly fish can be done in fresh or salt water. North American usual distinguish freshwat fish between cold-wat speci (trout, salmon, steelhead) and warm-wat species, notabl bass. In Britain, where natur water temperatur vari less, the distinct is between game fish for trout and salmon versu coars fish for other species. Techniqu for fly fish differ with habitat (lake and ponds, small streams, larg rivers, bai and estuaries, and open ocean.) Author Izaak Walton call fly fish "The Contempl Man' Recreation". Content 1 Main overview 1.1 Fish speci 2 Histori 2.1 Origin 2.2 Develop 2.3 Technolog improv 2.4 Expansion 3 Method 3.1 Cast 3.2 Spei cast 3.3 Fly fish for trout 4 Techniqu 4.1 Fish in cold water 4.2 Dry fly trout fish 4.3 Nymph for trout 4.4 Still water trout fish 4.5 Plai trout 4.6 Releas trout 4.7 Saltwat flyfish 5 Tackl 6 Artifici fli 7 Knot 8 See also 9 Refer 10 Further read Main overview Thi section need addit citat for verification. Pleas help improv thi articl by ad citat to reliabl sources. Unsourc materi mai be challeng and removed. (Jun 2016) (Learn how and when to remov thi templat message) Fly rod and reel with a brown trout from a chalk stream in England In fly fishing, fish ar caught by us artifici fli that ar cast with a fly rod and a fly line. The fly line (today, almost alwai coat with plastic) is heavi enough to send the fly to the target. The main differ between fly fish and spin or bait fish is that in fly fish the weight of the line carri the hook through the air, wherea in spin and bait fish the weight of the lure or sinker at the end of the monofila or braid line give cast distance. Artifici fli ar of sever types; some imit an insect (either fly or swimming), other a bait fish or crustacean, other attractor ar known to attract fish although thei look like noth in nature. Fli can be made either to float or sink, and rang in size from a few millimet to 30 cm long; most ar between 1 and 5 cm. Artifici fli ar made by fasten hair, fur, feathers, or other materials, both natur and synthetic, onto a hook. The first fli were ti with natur materials, but synthet materi ar now popular and prevalent. Fli ar ti in sizes, color and pattern to match local terrestri and aquat insects, baitfish, or other prei attract to the target fish species. Fish speci Fly fish is most renown as a method for catch trout, grayl and salmon, but it is also us for a wide varieti of speci includ pike, bass, panfish, and carp, as well as marin species, such as redfish, snook, tarpon, bonefish and stripe bass. Mani fly angler catch unintend speci such as chub, bream and rudd while fish for 'main target' speci such as trout. A grow popul of anglers[who?] attempt to catch as mani differ speci as possibl with the fly. With the advanc of technolog and develop of stronger rod and reels, larger predatori saltwat speci such as wahoo, tuna, marlin and shark have becom target speci on fly. Realist ani fish can be target and captur on fly as long as the main food sourc is effect replic by the fly itself and suitabl gear is used. Histori Mani credit the first record us of an artifici fly to the Roman Claudiu Aelianu near the end of the 2nd century. He describ the practic of Macedonian angler on the Astraeu River: ...thei have plan a snare for the fish, and get the better of them by their fisherman' craft. . . . Thei fasten red wool. . . round a hook, and fit on to the wool two feather which grow under a cock' wattles, and which in color ar like wax. Their rod is six feet long, and their line is the same length. Then thei throw their snare, and the fish, attract and madden by the color, come straight at it, think from the pretti sight to gain a dainti mouthful; when, however, it open it jaws, it is caught by the hook, and enjoi a bitter repast, a captive. In hi book Fish from the Earliest Times, however, William Radcliff (1921) gave the credit to Martial (Marcu Valeriu Martialis), born some two hundr year befor Aelianus, who wrote: ...Who ha not seen the scaru rise, decoi and kill by fraud flies... The last word, somewhat indistinct in the original, is either "mosco" (moss) or "musca" (fly) but catch fish with fraudul moss seem unlikely.[1][cit needed] The tradit Japanes method of fly-fish is known as "Tenkara" (Japanese: テンカラ, literally: "from heaven").[2] Tenkara origin in the mountain of Japan as a wai for profession fishermen and inn-keep to harvest the local fish, Ayu, trout and char for sell and provid a meal to their guests. Primarili a small-stream fish method that wa prefer for be highli efficient, where the long rod allow the fisherman to place the fly where the fish would be. Another style of fish in Japan is Ayu fishing. As written by historian Andrew Herd, in the book "The Fly", "Fly fish becam popular with Japanes peasant from the twelfth centuri onward...fish wa promot to a pastim worthi of Bushi (warriors), as part of an offici polici to train the Bushi' mind dure peacetime."[3] Thi refer primarili to Ayu fishing, which commonli us a fly as lure, us longer rods, but there is no cast techniqu required, it' more similar to dapping. Ayu wa practic in the lowland (foothills), where the Bushi resided, tenkara practic in the mountains. Fish fli ar thought to have origin in Japan for Ayu fish over 430 year ago.[4] These fli were made with needl that were bent into shape and us as fish hooks, then dress as a fly. The rod along with fish flies, ar consid to be a tradit local craft of the Kaga region.[5] Although angler in Scotland and Ireland had been fish the loch and lough for trout with an artifici fly for sever gener (a far back as 1840 John Colquhoun list the menu of fly dress in hi book The Moor and Loch detail the wings, bodi and hackl of artifici fli in us at the time), the histori of stillwat trout fish in English reservoir goe back littl more than a century. The simpl reason for that wa becaus (apart from the Lak District which wa somewhat isol befor the construct of the railways) England possess few larg stillwat that contain trout. That all chang when the water suppli reservoir began to be built to meet the increas demand for water from the big cities. The earliest of these reservoir to be stock with trout were Thrybergh Reservoir close to Doncast complet around 1880, Lak Vyrnwy, Powi in 1891, Ravensthorp Reservoir in Northamptonshir in 1895 and Blagdon Lak in Somerset which wa first open as a trout fisheri in 1904[6]. Origin Izaak Walton' The Compleat Angler, publish in 1653 help popular fly fish as a sport. Woodcut by Loui Rhead, 1900 Other than a few fragment refer littl wa written on fly fish until The Treatys on Fysshyng with an Angle wa publish (1496) within The Bok of Saint Alban attribut to Dam Juliana Berners. The book contain instruct on rod, line and hook make and dress for differ fli to us at differ time of the year. By the 15th century, rod of approxim fourteen feet length with a twist line attach at it tip were probabl us in England. The earliest English poetic treatis on Angling by John Dennys, said to have been a fish companion of Shakespeare, wa publish in 1613, The Secret of Angling. Footnot of the work, written by Dennys' editor, William Lawson, make the first mention of the phrase to 'cast a fly': "The trout give the most gentlemanli and readiest sport of all, if you fish with an artifici fly, a line twice your rod' length of three hairs' thickness... and if you have learnt the cast of the fly."[7] The art of fly fish took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newli found interest in the activ left it mark on the mani book and treatis that were written on the subject at the time. The renown offic in the Parliamentari army, Robert Venables, publish in 1662 The Experienc Angler, or Angling improved, be a gener discours of angling, impart mani of the aptest wai and choicest experi for the take of most sort of fish in pond or river. Another Civil War veteran to enthusiast take up fish wa Richard Franck. He wa the first to describ salmon fish in Scotland, and both in that and trout-fish with artifici fly he wa a practic angler. He wa the first angler to name the burbot, and commend the salmon of the River Thames.[8] The Compleat Angler wa written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continu to add to it for a quarter of a century) and describ the fish in the Derbyshir Wye. It wa a celebr of the art and spirit of fish in prose and verse; 6 vers were quot from John Dennys' earlier work. A second part to the book wa ad by Walton' friend Charl Cotton.[8] Walton did not profess to be an expert with a fish fly; the fly fish in hi first edit wa contribut by Thoma Barker, a retir cook and humorist, who produc a treatis of hi own in 1659; but in the us of the live worm, the grasshopp and the frog "Piscator" himself could speak as a master. The famou passag about the frog, often misquot as be about the worm—"us him as though you love him, that is, harm him as littl as you mai possibly, that he mai live the longer"—appear in the origin edition. Cotton' addit complet the instruct in fly fish and advis on the make of artifici fli where he list sixti five varieties. Charl Kirbi design an improv fish hook in 1655 that remain rel unchang to thi day. He went on to invent the Kirbi bend, a distinct hook with an offset point, still commonli us today.[9] Develop Trade card of the Ustonson company, an earli firm special in fish equipment, and holder of a Royal Warrant from the 1760s. The 18th centuri wa mainli an era of consolid of the techniqu develop in the previou century. Run ring began to appear along the fish rods, which gave angler greater control over the cast line. The rod themselv were also becom increasingli sophist and special for differ roles. Joint rod becam common from the middl of the centuri and bamboo came to be us for the top section of the rod, give it a much greater strength and flexibility. The industri also becam commerci - rod and tackl were sold at the haberdash store. After the Great Fir of London in 1666, artisan move to Redditch which becam a centr of product of fish relat product from the 1730s. Onesimu Ustonson establish hi trade shop in 1761, and hi establish remain as a market leader for the next century. He receiv a Royal Warrant and becam the offici supplier of fish tackl to three success monarch start with King Georg IV over thi period.[10] Som have credit Onesimu with the invent of the multipli winch, although he wa certainli the first to advertis it sale. Earli multipli reel were wide and had a small diameter, and their gears, made of brass, often wore down after extens use. Hi earliest advertis in the form of a trade card date from 1768 and wa entitl To all lover of angling. A full list of the tackl he sold includ artifici flies, and 'the best sort of multipli brass winch both stop and plain'. The commerci of the industri came at a time of expand interest in fish as a recreat hobbi for member of the aristocracy.[11] The impact of the Industrial Revolut wa first felt in the manufactur of fly lines. Instead of angler twist their own line - a labori and time-consum process - the new textil spin machin allow for a varieti of taper line to be easili manufactur and marketed. British fly-fish continu to develop in the 19th Century, with the emerg of fly fish clubs, along with the appear of sever book on the subject of fly ty and fly fish techniques. The Fly-fisher' Entomolog by Alfred Ronald had a great influenc on the develop of fly fish when it wa first publish in 1836. Alfred Ronald took up the sport of fly fishing, learn the craft on the river Trent, Blyth and Dove. On the River Blythe, near what is todai Creswel Green, Ronald construct a banksid fish hut design primarili as an observatori of trout behaviour in the river. From thi hut, and elsewher on hi home rivers, Ronald conduct experi and formul the idea that eventu were publish in The Fly-fisher' Entomolog in 1836.[12] He combin hi knowledg of fly fish with hi skill as an engrav and printer, to lavish hi work with 20 color plates. It wa the first comprehens work relat to the entomolog associ with fly fish and most fly-fish historian credit Ronald with set a literatur standard in 1836 that is still follow today.[13] Describ methods, techniqu and, most importantly, artifici flies, in a meaning wai for the angler and illustr them in colour is a method of present that can be seen in most fly-fish literatur today. The book wa mostli about the aquat insects—mayflies, caddisfli and stoneflies—that trout and grayl feed on and their counterpart artifici imitations. About half the book is devot to observ of trout, their behaviour, and the method and techniqu us to catch them. Most of thi information, although enhanc by Ronalds' experi and observations, wa mere an enhanc of Charl Bowlker' Art of Angling (first publish in 1774 but still in print in 1836).[14] In Chapter IV - Of a Select of Insects, and Their Imitations, Used in Fly Fish - for the first time is discuss specif artifici fly imit by name, associ with the correspond natur insect. Organiz by their month of appearance, Ronald wa the first author to begin the standard of angler name for artifici flies. Prior to The Fly-fisher' Entomology, angler had been given suggest for artifici fli to be us on a particular river or at a particular time of the year, but those suggest were never match to specif natur insect the angler might encount on the water.[15] Accord to Ernest Schwiebert: "Ronald is on of the major mileston in the entir literatur of fly-fishing, and with hi Entomolog the scientif method ha reach angl in full flower. Ronald wa complet origin in it content and research, set the yardstick for all subsequ discuss and illustr of aquat fly hatches.[16] Technolog improv 'Nottingham' and 'Scarborough' reel design Modern reel design had begun in England dure the latter part of the 18th century, and the predomin model in us wa known as the 'Nottingham reel'. The reel wa a wide drum which spool out freely, and wa ideal for allow the bait to drift a long wai out with the current. Gear multipli reel never successfulli caught on in Britain, but had more success in the Unite States, where similar model were modifi by Georg Snyder of Kentucki into hi bait-cast reel, the first American-mad design, in 1810.[17] The materi us for the rod itself chang from the heavi wood nativ to England, to lighter and more elast varieti import from abroad, especi from South America and the West Indies. Bamboo rod becam the gener favour option from the mid-19th century, and sever strip of the materi were cut from the cane, mill into shape, and then glu togeth to form light, strong, hexagon rod with a solid core that were superior to anyth that preced them. Georg Cotton and hi predecessor fish their fli with long rod and light lines, allow the wind to do most of the work of get the fly to the fish.[18] Fish becam a popular recreat activ in the 19th century. Print from Currier and Ives. Tackl design began to improv from the 1880s. The introduct of new wood to the manufactur of fly rod made it possibl to cast fli into the wind on silk lines, instead of hors hair. These line allow for a much greater cast distance. However, these earli fly line prove troublesom as thei had to be coat with variou dress to make them float and need to be taken off the reel and dri everi four hour or so to prevent them from becom waterlogged. Another neg consequ wa that it becam easi for the much longer line to get into a tangl – thi wa call a 'tangle' in Britain, and a 'backlash' in the US. Thi problem spur the invent of the regul to evenli spool the line out and prevent tangling.[18] An American, Charl F. Orvis, design and distribut a novel reel and fly design in 1874, describ by reel historian Jim Brown as the "benchmark of American reel design", and the first fulli modern fly reel.[19][20] The found of The Orvi Compani help institution fly fish by suppli angl equip via the circul of hi tackl catalogs, distribut to a small but devot custom list.[cit needed] Albert Illingworth, 1st Baron Illingworth, a textil magnate, patent the modern form of fixed-spool spin reel in 1905. When cast Illingworth' reel design, the line wa drawn off the lead edg of the spool, but wa restrain and rewound by a line pickup, a devic which orbit around the stationari spool. Becaus the line did not have to pull against a rotat spool, much lighter lure could be cast than with convent reels.[18] Expansion Frontispiec from The Art of Angling by Richard Brookes, 1790 By the mid to late 19th century, expand leisur opportun for the middl and lower class began to have it effect on fly fishing, which steadili grew in mass appeal. The expans of the railwai network in Britain allow the less affluent for the first time to take weekend trip to the seasid or to river for fishing. Richer hobbyist ventur further abroad.[21] The larg river of Norwai replet with larg stock of salmon began to attract fishermen from England in larg number in the middl of the centuri - Jones' guid to Norway, and salmon-fisher' pocket companion, publish in 1848, wa written by Freder Tolfrei and wa a popular guid to the country.[21] In southern England, dry-fli fish acquir an elitist reput as the onli reliabl method of fish the slower, clearer river of the south such as the River Test and the other chalk stream concentr in Hampshire, Surrey, Dorset and Berkshir (see Southern England Chalk Format for the geolog specifics). The weed found in these river tend to grow veri close to the surface, and it wa necessari to develop new techniqu that would keep the fly and the line on the surfac of the stream. These method becam the foundat of all later dry-fli developments. F. M. Halford wa a major expon and is gener accept as "The Father of Modern Dry Fly Fishing."[22][23] However, there wa noth to prevent the success employ of wet fli on these chalk streams, as G. E. M. Skue prove with hi nymph and wet fly techniques. To the horror of dry-fli purists, Skue later wrote two books, Minor Tactic of the Chalk Stream, and The Wai of a Trout with a Fly, which greatli influenc the develop of wet fly fishing. In northern England and Scotland, mani angler also favor wet-fli fishing, where the techniqu wa more popular and wide practic than in southern England. One of Scotland’ lead propon of the wet fly in the early-to-mid 19th centuri wa W.C. Stewart, who publish "The Practic Angler" in 1857. From The Speckl Brook Trout by Loui Rhead (1902) In the Unite States, attitud toward method of fly fish were not nearli as rigidli defined, and both dry- and wet-fli fish were soon adapt to the condit of the country. Fly angler there ar thought to be the first angler to have us artifici lure for bass fishing. After press into servic the fly pattern and tackl design for trout and salmon to catch largemouth and smallmouth bass, thei began to adapt these pattern into specif bass flies. Fly angler seek bass develop the spinner/fli lure and bass popper fly, which ar still us today.[24] In the late 19th century, American anglers, such as Theodor Gordon in the Catskil Mountain of New York, began us fly tackl to fish the region’ brook trout-rich stream such as the Beaverkil and Willowemoc Creek. Mani of these earli American fly angler also develop new fly pattern and wrote extens about their sport, increas the popular of fly fish in the region and in the Unite State as a whole.[24] Albert Bigelow Paine, a New England author, wrote about fly fish in The Tent Dwellers, a book about a three-week trip he and a friend took to central Nova Scotia in 1908. Particip in fly fish peak in the earli 1920 in the eastern state of Main and Vermont and in the Midwest in the spring creek of Wisconsin. Along with deep sea fishing, Ernest Hemingwai did much to popular fly fish through hi work of fiction, includ The Sun Also Rises. Fly fish in Australia took off when brown trout were first introduc by the effort of Edward Wilson' Acclimatis Societi of Victoria with the aim to "provid for manli sport which will lead Australian youth to seek recreat on the river' bank and mountainsid rather than in the Caf and Casino.[25] " The first success transfer of Brown Trout ova (from the Itchen and Wye) wa accomplish by Jam Arndell Youl, with a consign aboard The Norfolk in 1864. Rainbow Trout were not introduc until 1894. It wa the develop of inexpens fiberglass rods, synthet fly lines, and monofila leaders, however, in the earli 1950s, that reviv the popular of fly fishing. In recent years, interest in fly fish ha surg as babi boomer have discov the sport. Movi such as Robert Redford' film A River Run Through It, star Craig Sheffer and Brad Pitt, cabl fish shows, and the emerg of a competit fly cast circuit have ad to the sport' visibility. Method Cast Maramec spring fish Fly casting, Maramec Spring Branch, Missouri Unlike other cast methods, fly fish can be thought of as a method of cast line rather than lure. Non-flyfish method reli on a lure' weight to pull line from the reel dure the forward motion of a cast. By design, a fly is too light to be cast, and thu simpli follow the unfurl of a properli cast fly line, which is heavier and taper and therefor more castabl than line us in other type of fishing. The physic of flycast can be describ by the transfer of impulse, the product of mass and speed through the rod from base to top and from the transfer of impuls through the fly line all the wai to the tip of the leader. Becaus both the rod and the fly line ar taper the smaller amount of mass will reach high speed as the wave in rod and line unfurl.[26] The wave that travel through the fly line ar call loops. Determin factor in reach the highest speed ar the basal frequenc of a rod and the transfer of the speed from the tip of the rod to the fly line. At the moment the rod tip reach it highest veloc the direct of the cast is determined. Fly angler circa 1970 The type of cast us when fish vari accord to the conditions. The most common cast is the forward cast, where the angler whisk the fly into the air, back over the shoulder until the line is nearli straight, then forward, us primarili the forearm. The object of thi motion is to "load" (bend) the rod tip with store energy, then transmit that energi to the line, result in the fly line (and the attach fly) be cast for an appreci distance. However, just bend the rod and releas it to jerk the fly line forward (like a bowstr or a catapult) will not propel the fly line and fly veri far. Mor import is the movement of the rod through an arc act as a lever, magnifi the hand movement of the caster (of about a foot) to an arc at the rod tip of sever feet. Her the rod act as a lever. In fact, on of the Class 3 type of lever, where The forc is appli between the fulcrum and the load (like tweezers). The fulcrum in the fly cast is below the caster' hand grip the rod; the load is at the rod tip; between the hand exert the force. The caster' "stroke" backward and forwards, for the backcast and the forward cast, oper the rod as a (slightli flexible) lever. Cast without land the fly on the water is known as 'fals casting', and mai be us to pai out line, to dry a soak fly, or to reposit a cast. Other cast ar the roll cast, the single- or double-haul, the tuck cast, and the side- or curve-cast. Drop the fly onto the water and it subsequ movement on or beneath the surfac is on of fly fishing' most difficult aspects; the angler is attempt to cast in such a wai that the line land smoothli on the water and the fly appear as natur as possible. At a certain point, if a fish doe not strike, depend upon the action of the fly in the wind or current, the angler pick up the line to make anoth presentation. On the other hand, if a fish strikes, the angler pull in line while rais the rod tip. Thi "sets" the hook in the fish' mouth. The fish is plai either by hand, where the angler continu to hold the fly line in on hand to control the tension appli to the fish, or by reel up ani slack in the line and then us the hand to act as a drag on the reel. Most modern fly reel have an adjustable, mechan drag system to control line tension dure a fish' run. Beginn tend to point with the rod to where thei want to throw, but the movement of the hand ha to be a control speed-up and then come to an abrupt stop. The rod will then start to unfurl and the tip of the rod will reach a high speed in the requir direction. The high speed of the rod tip toward the target give the impuls to make the cast, the abrupt stop and retreat of the rod tip is essenti for the format of a loop. Experienc fishermen also improv the speed of the line leav the rod tip by a techniqu call hauling, appli a quick fast pull with the hand hold the line. At the end of the cast when the line is stretch the line as a whole will still have speed and the fisherman can let some extra line through their finger make a fals throw, either forward or backward or to finish the cast and start fishing. There ar a great number of special cast meant to evad problem like tree behind the angler (roll cast), the pull of the line on the fly by the action of the stream, or to make the fly land more softly. Spei cast Spei cast is a cast techniqu us in fly fishing. Spei cast requir a longer, heavier two-hand fly rod, refer to as a "Spei rod".[27] Spei cast is essenti a larg roll cast, develop on the Scottish River Spei where high bank do not allow space for the usual back cast. Spei cast is us for fish larg river for salmon and larg trout such as steelhead and sea trout. Spei techniqu is also us in saltwat surf casting. All of these situat requir the angler to cast larger fli long distances. The two-hand Spei techniqu allow more power cast and avoid obstacl on the shore by keep most of the line in front of the angler. Fly fish for trout Fly angler on the Firehol River, USA Fly fish for trout is a veri popular sport, which can be done us ani of the variou method and ani of the gener type of flies. Mani of the techniqu and present of fly fish were first develop in fish for trout. There is a misconcept that all fly fish for trout is done on the surfac of the water with "dry flies." In most places, especi heavili fish trout areas, success usual come from fly fish us fli call "nymphs" that ar design to drift close to the riverbed, also call "nymphing". A trout feed below the water' surfac nearli 90 percent of the time. Trout usual onli come to the surfac when there is a larg bug hatch (when aquat insect grow wing and leav the water to mate and lai eggs). There ar except to thi rule, however, particularli dure the summer month and on smaller mountain streams, when trout often feed on terrestri insect such as ants, beetl and grasshoppers.[28] Techniqu Fish in cold water In order to deceiv wari trout, or to reach deep run where salmon mai lie, the fly angler often need to wade to the right cast position. He therefor requir sure foot and insul from cold water, both provid by hip boot or chest-high waders. The latter ar of two main types, one-piec "boot foot" wader and "stock foot" waders, which requir extern boots. Formerli of latex rubber, "stock foot" wader ar now made of neoprene, usual 3 mm thick, which provid addit warmth. In the mid-20th century, American angler develop felt boot sole for a better grip in rocki rivers: but felt is now prohibit in some US states, as a vector of fish and plant diseas that damag sport fisheries. Manufactur now offer wade boot with special rubber tread or metal studs. Breathabl Gore-Tex wader provid ventil when hike along the water, but do not provid flotat in the event of slip or fall into deep water. In deep water streams, an inflat person flotat devic (PFD), or a Typ III Kayak fish vest, add a degre of safety. Som "catch and release" angler flatten the barb of their hook. Such "barbless hooks" ar much easier to remov from the fish (and from the angler, in the event of mishap). Mani river with special regul mandat that fishermen us barbless hook in an effort to conserv a healthi fish population.[29] Dry fly trout fish Main article: Dry fly fish Dry fly fish is done with line and fli that float, join by a leader, usual made of fine polyamid monofila line. The taper leader is 3 to 5 meter long, thu nearli invis where the fly is knotted, and the angler can replac the last meter of nylon as required. Unlike sink fly (nymph) fishing, the "take" on dry fli is visible, explos and exciting. While trout typic consum about 90% of their diet from below-wat sources, the 10% of surface-level consumpt by trout is more than enough to keep most angler busy. Additionally, begin fly angler gener prefer dry fly fish becaus of the rel eas of detect a strike and the instant gratif of see a trout strike their fly. Nymph fish mai be more productive, but dry fly angler soon becom addict to the surfac strike. An Adam dry fly Dry fli mai be "attractors", such as the Royal Wulff, or "natur imitators", such as the elk hair caddis, a caddisfli imitation[30] A beginn mai wish to begin with a fly that is easi to see such as a Royal Wulff attractor or a mayfli imit such as a parachut adams. The "parachute" on the parachut adam make the fly land as softli as a natur on the water and ha the ad benefit of make the fly veri visibl from the surface. Be abl to see the fly is especi help to the beginner. The fly should land softly, as if drop onto the water, with the leader fulli extend from the fly line. Due to river have faster and slower current often run side by side, the fly can over take or be overtaken by the line, thu disturb the fly' drift. Mend is a techniqu wherebi on lift and move the part of the line that requir re-align with the fly' drift, thu extend the drag free drift. The mend can be upstream or down stream depend on the current carri the line or fly. To be effective, ani mend of the fly line should not disturb the natur drift of the fly. Learn to mend is often much easier if the angler can see the fly.[31] Once a fish ha been caught and landed, the fly mai no longer float well. A fly can sometim be dri and made to float again by "false" casting, cast the fly back and forth in the air. In some cases, the fly can be dri with a small piec of reusabl absorb towel, an amad patch or chamoi and after dry place and shaken in a contain full of fly "dressing"; a hydrophob solution. A popular solut to a dry fly which refus to float is simpli to replac it with another, similar or ident fly until the origin can fulli dry, rotat through a set of flies. Fly fish on the Gardner River in Yellowston Nation Park, USA Dry fly fish on small, clear-wat stream can be especi product if the angler stai as low to the ground and as far from the bank as possible, move upstream with stealth. Trout tend to face upstream and most of their food is carri to them on the current. For thi reason, the fish' attent is normal focus into the current; most angler move and fish "into the current", fish from a posit downstream of the fish' suspect lie. Trout tend to strike their food at current "edges", where faster- and slower-mov water mix. Obstruction to the stream flow, such as larg rock or nearbi pools, provid a "low energy" environ where fish sit and wait for food without expend much energy. Cast upstream to the "edge" of the slower water, the angler can see the fly land and drift slowli back downstream. The challeng in stream fish is place the fly with deadli accuracy, within inch of a protect rock for instance, not long rang casting. Don properly, the fly seem to be just float along in the current with a "perfect drift" as if not connect to the fly line. The angler must remain vigil for the "take" in order to be readi to rais the rod tip and set the hook. Nymph for trout Trout tend mostli to feed underwater. When fish deeper water such as river or lakes, put a fly down to the trout mai be more success than fish on the surface, especi in the absenc of ani surfac insect activ or hatch. The nymph itself can be weighted, as is the popular bead head hare' ear nymph or bead head pheasant tail nymph. Alternatively, the angler can us an attractor pattern such as a princ nymph. Weight can be ad to the leader. Probabl the best weight to us is twist on lead or other metal strip becaus it ha a much less detriment effect on the cast ability. A sink tip fly line can also serv to sink the fly. A common nymph and gener overal fly fish techniqu that even beginn can master is a "dead drift" or tight line fish technique, cast directli across the river, let the fly line drift downriv while keep ani slack out of the line. If the Nymph is drift too fast, then you should perform an upstream mend. If the nymph is drift too slowly, you should mend downstream. A beginn need simpli to point the rod at the fly, lift the rod in the event of a strike. Thi is a "downstream technique" where the angler move in a downstream direction. Mor advanc techniqu make us of a highli visibl strike indic attach to the leader abov the sink fly. In New Zealand, nymph ha becom the domin form of fish in river such as the Tongariro River. A techniqu involv a high visibl indicator, and 2 nymph ti in short success (a weight nymph and a 2nd often un-weight nymph) mean the chanc of get a fly into deeper water with a fly that still move natur increases. It is also possibl to us standard sink fly lines, especi if the current is strong and if it is difficult to get down to the correct level to catch the trout. Still water trout fish A rainbow trout taken on an articul leech pattern, Bristol Bai Region, Alaska Fish for trout in lake requir differ tactics. A canoe, pontoon boat or a float tube allow an angler to cover a lot more water than waders. Trout mai congreg in cooler water near an inflow stream or an underwat spring and mai be lure to bite on a streamer fly. An often success tactic is to pull a streamer such as a woolli bugger us clear sink line, behind the watercraft. The somewhat errat motion of the oar or fin tend to give the streamer an entic action. Trout also tend to "cruise" transit area (e.g. dropoffs, weed bed edges, subsurfac river flow at inlets, etc.) Watch for cruis trout and cast well ahead of ani visibl fish is often successful. The legaci of Dr Howard Alexand Bell (1888-1974). Although he never wrote a word about fish and shun publicity, Dr Bell of Blagdon had the greatest form influenc of ani man on the develop of reservoir fish in the first half of thi century. In those dai Blagdon wa fish with spinner or with tradit sea-trout and low-wat salmon flies. Fly fish wa carri out from boat and bank dure the even rise. Daytim fish with the fly wa thought to be of littl use. Bell had read Skue and, follow hi example, us a marrow spoon to spoon out the trout he caught (on of hi friend said, ‘He would spoon out hi grandmoth if he thought there wa anyth in her’). The stomach content of the Blagdon trout were a revelation. There wa noth there but small larva and pupae, among them the pupa of the famou black midge[32]. Dr Bell ti artifici to repres the insect that he found in the Blagdon trout, includ bloodworms, midg and sedg pupa and beetles. Hi fli were quit small, 10s, 12 and sometim 14s. He might have a Worm Fly on a singl hook on the point, a Grenadi (caddi pupa) on the middl dropper and a Buzzer (midg pupa) on the top. All hi dress were plain and simple. Nevertheless in the 1920 and 30 he set the scene and point the wai in which imit pattern of underwat insect were to develop as on of the major techniqu of reservoir trout fishing[33]. Plai trout Once hooked, a small trout can be easili retriev "on the reel" or by simpli pull in the fly line with the reel hand while pinch the line between the rod handl and the index finger of the rod hand. It is import to keep the rod tip high, allow the bend of the rod to absorb the forc of the fish' struggl against the line. Larger trout will often take line in power run befor thei can be landed. Unlike spin fish where the line is alreadi on the reel, plai a larg fish with fly line and a fly reel can present a special challenge. Usually, when a fish is hooked, there will be extra fly line coil between the reel and the index finger of the rod hand. The challeng is to reel up the loos fly line onto the reel without break off a larg fish (or get the line wrap up around the rod handle, one' foot, a stick or anyth els in the way). With experience, realli larg trout can be put on the reel simpli by appli light pressur on the outgo line us the fisher' fingers. Once the extra line is on the reel, an angler can us the reel' drag system to tire the fish. It is import to us heavier tippet materi if it won't spook the fish. The reason why thi is import is an exhaust fish can easili die if releas too soon. Heavier tippet materi enabl the angler to land the fish while not over exhaust it. Releas trout Main article: Catch and releas Releas wild trout help preserv the qualiti of a fishery. Trout ar more delic than most fish and requir care handling. When a trout ha been caught but the hook is still embedded, wet your hand befor handl the fish. Dry hand stick to the adhes slime coat the fish and can pull off it scales. It is prefer for the fish to remain in the water when remov the hook, but hold the trout out of the water will not be lethal, provid the hook is remov quickli and the trout is return immediately. Small trout caught on a barb-less hook can be releas simpli by: grasp the eyelet of the fly, and rotat the eyelet toward the bend (the U-bend). Thi pull the point backwards, back through the wai it entered. Push the eyelet directli toward the bend until the point is remov from the fish. Larg trout can be grasp gentli and forcep can be us to grip the bend and push backwards, awai from the direct the hook current points. If necessary, squirm trout can be held on their backs. Thi often subdu the fish and provid enough time to remov the hook. Once the hook ha been removed, return the trout into the water. Support the trout until it stabilizes. Thi includ hold the fish in water deep enough to submerg it gills. After long fights, it mai be necessari to manual move water past it gills. Thi can be done either by hold the trout in move water with it head face upstream, or, in calm water, move the trout backward and forward repeatedly. Once stabilized, the trout will swim off on it own. If releas prematurely, the trout, not have enough energi to move, will sink to the bottom of the river and suffocate. Tak howev long is necessari to reviv a trout. Saltwat flyfish A red drum caught on a fly rod, Louisiana, USA Saltwat flyfish is typic done with heavier tackl than that which is us for freshwat trout fishing, both to handl the larger, more power fish, and to accommod the cast of larger and heavier flies. Salt water fly fish typic emploi the us of wet fli resembl baitfish, crabs, shrimp and other forage. However, saltwat fish can also be caught with popper and other surfac lure similar to those us for freshwat bass fishing, though much larger. Saltwat speci sought and caught with fly tackl include: bonefish, redfish or red drum, permit, snook, spot sea trout, tuna, dorado (mahi-mahi), sailfish, tarpon, stripe bass, salmon, giant treval and marlin. Offshore saltwat speci ar usual attract to the fly by "chumming" with small baitfish, or "teasing" the fish to the boat by troll a larg hookless lure (Billfish ar most often caught us thi latter method). Mani saltwat species, particularli large, fast and power fish, ar not easili slow down by "palming" the hand on the reel. Instead, a purpose-mad saltwat reel for these speci must have a power drag system. Furthermore, saltwat reel purpose-mad for larger fish must be larger, heavier, and corrosion-resistant; a typic high-qual saltwat reel cost 500.00 USD or more. Corrosion-resist equip is kei to durabl in all type of saltwat fishing, regardless of the size and power of the target species. Saltwat Fly Fish in Louisiana Saltwat fly fish is most often done from a boat, either a shallow draft flat boat is us to pursu speci such as bonefish, redfish, permit and tarpon in shallow waters, or from larger offshor boat for pursu sailfish, tuna, dorado, marlin and other pelag and mai be done from shore, such as wade flat for bonefish or redfish or surf fish for stripe bass and other assort fish. Typically, most trout fly fisherman need to practic new skill to catch saltwat fish on a fly rod. Ocean fish ar usual harder to catch. Thei can be extrem spooky, and much larger. Trout fisherman need to practic with at least an 8 weight fly rod and accur cast the line 30–90 feet if thei ar go to have success—particularli in the flat area fish for bonefish, redfish, permit, tarpon, jack and more. Hook for saltwat fli must also be extrem durabl and corros resistant. Most saltwat hook ar made of stainless steel, but the strongest (though less corros resistant) hook ar of high-carbon steel. Typically, these hook vari from size #8 to #2 for bonefish and smaller nearshor species, to size #3/0 to #5/0 for the larger offshor species. Tackl Main article: Fly fish tackl A varieti of fly reel on displai at a fly fish show Fly fish tackl compris the fish tackl or equip typic us by fly anglers. Fly fish tackl includes: A wide varieti of Fly rod of differ weights, length and materi ar us to present artifici fli to target speci of fish as well as fight and land fish be caught. A wide varieti of Fly reel ar us to store fly line and provid a brake mechan (drag) for fight heavi or fast move fish. A wide varieti of gener us and special fly line ar us to cast artifici fli under a wide varieti of fresh and saltwat conditions. Termin tackl is us to connect the artifici fly to the fly line and allow the appropri present of the fly to the fish. There ar a wide varieti of accessories—tools, gadgets, cloth and apparel us by the fly angler for mainten and prepar of tackle, deal the fish be caught as well as person comfort and safeti while fly fishing. Include fly box us to store and carri artifici flies. Fly rod ar typic between 1.8 m (6 ft) long in freshwat fish and up to 4.5 m (15 ft) long for two-hand fish for salmon or steelhead, or in tenkara fish in small streams. The averag rod for fresh and salt water is around 9 feet (2.7 m) in length and weigh from 3 –5 ounces, though a recent trend ha been to lighter, shorter rod for fish smaller streams. Another trend is to longer rod for small streams. The choic of rod length and line weight us vari accord to local conditions, type of fli be cast, and/or person preference. When activ fishing, the angler mai want to keep the fly line lightli press against the rod handl with the index finger of the cast arm. The free arm is us to pull line from the reel or to retriev line from the water. If a fish strikes, the angler can pinch the line with the index finger against the rod handl and lift the rod tip, set the hook. Artifici fli Green Highlander, a classic salmon fly Main article: Artifici fly Further information: Fly ty Reservoir nymph pattern devis by Dr Bell of Wrington In broadest terms, fli ar categoris as either imit or attractive. Imit fli resembl natur food items. Attractiv fli trigger instinct strike by emploi a rang of characterist that do not necessarili mimic prei items. Fli can be fish float on the surfac (dry flies), partial submerg (emergers), or below the surfac (nymphs, streamers, and wet flies). A dry fly is typic thought to repres an insect land on, fall on (terrestrials), or emerg from, the water' surfac as might a grasshopper, dragonfly, mayfly, ant, beetle, stonefli or caddisfly. Other surfac fli includ popper and hair bug that might resembl mice, frogs, etc. Sub-surfac fli ar design to resembl a wide varieti of prei includ aquat insect larvae, nymph and pupae, baitfish, crayfish, leeches, worms, etc. Wet flies, known as streamers, ar gener thought to imit minnows, leech or scuds. Throughout history, artifici fli construct of furs, feathers, and thread bound on a hook have been creat by angler to imit fish prey. The first known mention of an artifici fly wa in 200AD in Macedonia. Most earli exampl of artifici fli imit common aquat insect and baitfish. Today, artifici fli ar ti with a wide varieti of natur and synthet materi (like mylar and rubber) to repres all manner of potenti freshwat and saltwat fish prei to includ aquat and terrestri insects, crustaceans, worms, baitfish, vegetation, flesh, spawn, small reptiles, amphibians, mammal and birds, etc. Knot Further information: Category:Fish knot A few knot have becom more or less standard for attach the variou part of the fly line and backing, etc., together. A detail discuss of most of these knot is avail in ani good book on fly fishing. Som of the knot that ar in most everi fly angler' arsen are: the improv clinch knot which is commonli us to attach the fly to the leader, the overhand slip knot or arbor knot which is us to attach the back to the spool, the albright knot which can be us to attach the fly line to the backing. A loop can also be put in fly line back us a bimini twist.[34] Often, a loop is ad to the busi end of the fly line to facilit the connect to the leader. Thi loop mai take on of sever forms. It mai be form by creat a loop in the end of the fly line itself or by ad a braid loop or a loop of monofila nylon (a in Gray' Loop). Alternatively, a singl length of monofila nylon, or fluorocarbon, mai be ti to the end of the fly line us a nail or tube knot or a needl knot. A loop can then be ti at the end of thi monofila butt length or butt section us a doubl surgeon' knot or a perfect loop, to which the taper or untap leader, also loop us a doubl surgeon' knot or a perfect loop, mai in turn be connect via a loop to loop connection.[35] The us of loop to loop connect between the fly line and the leader provid a quick and conveni wai to chang or replac a taper leader. Mani commerci produc taper leader come with a pre-ti loop connection. Som traditionalist creat their own taper leader us progress smaller-diamet length of monofila line ti togeth with the blood, barrel knot or "surgeon knot". 

HOME A MAN'S LIFE STYLE & GROOMING HEALTH & SPORTS MANLY SKILLS MONEY & CAREER RELATIONSHIPS & FAMILY PODCAST SHOP MORE SEARCH Jeremi Anderberg | October 18, 2017 Last updated: Mai 28, 2018 Manli Skills, Outdoor How to Get Start With Fly Fish vintag man fly fish in river Fish with a rod and line, and an artifici lightweight lure made to imit fish prei — that is, fly fish — wa first record around the year 200. And while modern innov ha improv the qualiti and durabl of the materials, the basic of the sport and pastim have remain larg the same. Attach a lure (or “fly”) to a line, cast it in the water, and see what happens. Grow up, I fish in a boat with my uncl everi now and then, but didn’t take it up on my own beyond that. Ever sinc move to Colorado 5 year ago, though, I’ve been intrigu by fly fishing. You see fishermen in nearli everi stream you pass by, and our famili often encount them on the trail we traverse. It seem like such an eleg wai to pass the time and settl your mind, while also fulfil the ancient role of Provider. So over Labor Day, I final decid to hire a guid and learn the ropes. Below, I’ll share those rope with you: why you’d choos fly fish over other methods, gear to look for, fly and cast basics, and final some concret tip on actual get yourself start with thi age-old pursuit. Keep in mind thi is a guid for folk who have either never fly fished, or have onli done so a small hand of time and with littl knowledge. It’ for men who’ve want to get into fly fishing, but haven’t known where to begin. If that’ you, I hope thi guid can point you in the right direction. Why Fly Fish? What Distinguish It From Other Typ of Fishing? “To go fish is the chanc to wash one’ soul with pure air, with the rush of the brook, or with the shimmer of sun on blue water. It bring meek and inspir from the decenc of nature, chariti toward tackle-makers, patienc toward fish, a mockeri of profit and egos, a quiet of hate, a rejoic that you do not have to decid a darn thing until next week. And it is disciplin in the equal of men — for all men ar equal befor fish.” —Herbert Hoover, avid fly fishermen While spin cast with a spin reel is a great introduct to fishing, mani angler would argu fly fish elev thi pastim into a real art. Why is this? What ar the differences? When it come to the practicalities, the differ ar many. To name just a few, in fly fishing: the rod ar lightweight and much longer the bait (or “fly”) is super lightweight, artificial, and meant to imit food (rather than us live bait or heavi lures) the line itself is heavier, and is what provid the weight to cast, versu the bait or lure itself you’re typic fish in move water (and often in the water) vs. the still water of lake you’re almost constantli in motion rather than just sit on a boat wait for a bobber to dip; your arm get a good workout Beyond the practic differences, fly fish is often label as the purer form. It requir craftsmanship and true skill to cast your line, the fli themselv ar work of art, and as we’ll see, you becom a true master of the environment. When I ask my guid why fly fish, he grin like the answer wa obviou and said, “Why wouldn’t you?” With spin reel fishing, the goal is often a combin of relax and volum — catch as mani fish as you can while have a nice out on a boat or sit in a chair on the shoreline. It’ just easier. With fly fishing, it’ more of a challenge. Can you trick the fish into bite onto your fly/hook? Not onli that, can you successfulli get the fish hook at the right moment, and teas it into your hands/net? Can you navig the stream, and know exactli where to place (or “present”) your fly, so the fish ar most like to bite? All of thi is why you see romant stori (and even philosophi books!) about fly fishing; it’ just a more poetic and art form of the sport. Now that we know the “why,” let’ get more into the “how.” What Kind of Gear Do You Need? fly fish gear and cloth While you don’t need everyth pictur abov when you’re first start with fly fishing, thi give you a gener overview of the kind of thing you’ll like eventu acquir and take with you as you get more into it. For a full descript of each item pictured, click here. When you think of fishing, and especi get start with it, you like think of all the stuff you’ll need to be successful. When I first got to the fly fish shop and my guid wa walk through all the gear we’d be take advantag of, I wa a littl bit intimidated. There were multipl type and weight of line used, a case full of fli (rang in size from a pinki nail to finger-length), gel to coat and waterproof the fly, tool and cutter for knot-ti and knot-untangling, not to mention waders, vests, and other cloth essentials. I think my guid saw my wide eyes, becaus he then said, “Really, you don’t need thi much stuff to start. Grab a pole, some line, and some flies, throw it in the water, and see what happens.” He then told me the stori of a kid in town he knew who would tie some line to a stick, tie on a fly, and drop it in the water — and he’d catch some fish to boot. Lik with anything, when you embrac fly fish you’ll like end up with plenti of special gear, but you don’t need all that when you’re first start out. Fli assort of fly fish fli lure Sourc Fly fish get it name from the bait that is used: artifici “flies” made to imit what the fish ar eat — bug usual (like variou type of . . . you guess it, flies!), but sometim even small rodent and other creatures. There ar numer type and size of fli — dry flies, nymphs, streamer — and what you us will depend on the fish you’re try to catch and your setting. If the fish aren’t biting, you’ll often chang out a fly and try to intuit what thei might be after that dai or season. Thi is why fly fishermen ar often amateur ichthyologist (fish scientists) and entomologist (insect scientists). Thei know type of fish, what those fish eat in what season, what the bug look like at differ time of the year, etc. My guide’ biolog knowledg after year of fish wa truli astounding. improv clinch knot fly fish how-to diagram Sourc Once you can determin the right fly to use, there ar a coupl differ accept knot for attach that fly to your line, but the “improv clinch knot” seem to a favorit among a lot of experts. Check out thi guid to not onli that knot, but a hand of other us in fly fish as well. dii homemad fish fly lure A great closeup of a homemad fly. You can see the color thread carefulli wrap about the hook, with feather and hair attach to creat that bug-lik look. Once you explor fly fishing, you’ll like hear about folk who ar “fly tying.” Thi is not a term for ty your fly to your line (a I initi and veri naiv thought), but rather a term for make your own fli rather than bui them. You’d do thi to possibl save monei (fli ar easi to lose in tree or to rowdi fish), but also for the art of it. Fli truli ar work of art, creat with variou materi like beads, foams, anim hairs, and much more. The beginn angler will not be fly tying; there ar liter book written on the craft, and it requir a whole other set of tool and skills. Thi is someth to look into after you’ve gotten the hang of the fish itself. Cast and Catch The GIF abov is from an Orvi instruct video. Thei have dozen of fly fish video for you to peruse. Once you have your gear and fly all set, it’ time to cast. When you watch season fly fishermen in action on the stream, it’ like see art in motion. The wai the arm moves, follow by the line and fly, so delic place on the water exactli where it’ wanted. Let me tell ya, that’ not what it look like for the rank beginner. So here’ the scoop on fly casting: find someon to teach you. That’ truli the key. I could try to describ in text and illustr how it happens, but that’ just not go to work. For thi article, I actual research the viabil of put togeth an illustr guid on casting. But when I saw other guid that were out there and folk try to describ it, I actual got more confus than when I wa with my guid and try it out with a rod in hand. There ar too mani type of casting, too mani subtl motion and arm movements, and too mani wai to make mistak for me to try to relat that all to you here on a website. Of all the project and skill I’ve written about for the Art of Manliness, thi is the on that most need to be learn in the flesh, either from a friend or famili member who fishes, or from an expert who you’ve paid to help guid you along. The same goe for hook and ultim catch the fish. There’ a whole terminolog that goe into cast and catching: Present Monofila Strike Indicat Set the hook Leader Tippet Riffl And thi is just a small sample. You don’t want to be wade into those water on your own — liter or metaphorically. So, how doe the beginn actual go about get started? Let’ take a look at that next. Tip for Get Started: A Linear Progress Tak a class. Chanc ar high that no matter where you live, some outfitt is offer a class on fly fishing. Be it a sport good store, a dedic fly fish shop, or even a commun college, there ar a lot of place put on free (or low-cost) class to learn the art. Orvi is a great place to look — thei offer free class in 42 states. Thei tend to start with a lectur portion on what I’ve cover abov (but more in-depth), follow by hands-on instruct about lines, knots, flies, and casting. Depend on the shop, they’ll also have next-level classes, which sometim includ practic in a stock pond. man cast fly into east river colorado fly fish Cast a line into the East River near Crest Butte, CO. I had a great experi with Almont Anglers; give ’em a shout if you’re in the area! Hir a guide. After you’ve taken a class or two, hire yourself a guid to take you on a half-dai or full-dai out on the water. (If, that is, you don’t have an experienc friend or famili member will to take you and show you the ropes.) You can onli learn so much in a classroom setting, even if there is some hands-on instruct involved. There’ noth like be in the stream and see what a season vet doe in regard to which fli to use, where to cast, how he troubleshoot things, etc. I would recommend go in that order of take a class first befor hire a guide. I did not do that, and about half of our half-dai togeth wa spent teach me the rope and practic in a pond, which like could have all been accomplish beforehand. A guid can be expens — look to spend $150-$500 depend on your location, and whether you’re do a full-dai or half-dai outing. Mak for a great gift to save up for if that’ a littl out of reach. Practic ty your knot and casting. While not on the water, you can practic a few thing at home. First, work on your knots; line and fli (which ar often tiny) need ty together, and it’ onli with plenti of practic that you can do so deftli and efficiently. My guid could rig up a fly in less than 30 seconds, while I wa fumbl with what felt like sausag finger for a coupl minut befor get it just right. That doesn’t seem like much time, but when you’re out in the river, it add up. Plus, if you’re fumbl with your fly in the water, drop it mean lose a coupl buck right then and there. Along with the guid list abov in the “Flies” section, Orvi also ha a good encyclopedia of knot that on might us while fly fishing. (Thei truli ar a gold mine of fly fish info and instruction.) You can also practic cast at home, though it’ admittedli a littl tougher becaus you need adequ room to do it. If your drivewai or backyard is long enough, start there. If you don’t have room at home, go to a larg park, or even a lake to practic your casting, with actual fish be a secondari pursuit to your practic efforts. Start in lakes. While fly fish is gener pictur as take place in streams, plenti of fishermen practic their craft in lakes. Especial here in Colorado, it’ rather common to see gui (and gals) wade into cold mountain lakes. For the beginner, that’ go to be the easier rout to go for on main reason: it’ just easier to keep an ey on your fly when the water is still. When fly fishing, there’ no bobber or super obviou jump on the line to cue you into a fish be hooked. Rather, you have to carefulli watch your fly and line, and tug up when you see or feel slight movement in order to hook the fish (call “set the hook”). In a flow river or creek, when your fly and line is drift and undul with the current, it’ realli hard to tell if that gentl tug on the line is a fish, or just a rock, or even the tug of the water itself. Start in lake to realli get the hang of things. Prepar to practice. A lot. I ask my guid about how long it took him to realli master all thi stuff, and he said it happen in phases. First you get good at cast and ty your knots, then you get good at notic when a fish ha shown interest in your fly, then you get good at set the hook, then you get good at successfulli reel in and nab your fish, and final onc you have all that stuff taken care of, you can pai attent to the scienc of the fish and bugs, and know how to read the water and your environs. So, be prepar to try a lot, and fail a lot, befor get to a point of truli be comfort in the water. Previou Post Next Post Daili Weekli Daili Weekli aom-podcast-big-button new Random Post Podcast Man Knowledg RECOMMENDED FOR YOU Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com AddThi CONTACT ADVERTISE LEGAL COMMENT POLICY The Art of Manli Copyright © 2018 All Right Reserv Built with iTheme Builder on WordPress by Screen Four A Man’ Lif Dress & Groom Manli Skill Relationship & Famili Health & Sport Shop Mor Strenuouslif 1.9K SHARES 1.9K SHARES Focu Retriev HOME A MAN'S LIFE STYLE & GROOMING HEALTH & SPORTS MANLY SKILLS MONEY & CAREER RELATIONSHIPS & FAMILY PODCAST SHOP MORE SEARCH Jeremi Anderberg | October 18, 2017 Last updated: Mai 28, 2018 Manli Skills, Outdoor How to Get Start With Fly Fish vintag man fly fish in river Fish with a rod and line, and an artifici lightweight lure made to imit fish prei — that is, fly fish — wa first record around the year 200. And while modern innov ha improv the qualiti and durabl of the materials, the basic of the sport and pastim have remain larg the same. Attach a lure (or “fly”) to a line, cast it in the water, and see what happens. Grow up, I fish in a boat with my uncl everi now and then, but didn’t take it up on my own beyond that. Ever sinc move to Colorado 5 year ago, though, I’ve been intrigu by fly fishing. You see fishermen in nearli everi stream you pass by, and our famili often encount them on the trail we traverse. It seem like such an eleg wai to pass the time and settl your mind, while also fulfil the ancient role of Provider. So over Labor Day, I final decid to hire a guid and learn the ropes. Below, I’ll share those rope with you: why you’d choos fly fish over other methods, gear to look for, fly and cast basics, and final some concret tip on actual get yourself start with thi age-old pursuit. Keep in mind thi is a guid for folk who have either never fly fished, or have onli done so a small hand of time and with littl knowledge. It’ for men who’ve want to get into fly fishing, but haven’t known where to begin. If that’ you, I hope thi guid can point you in the right direction. Why Fly Fish? What Distinguish It From Other Typ of Fishing? “To go fish is the chanc to wash one’ soul with pure air, with the rush of the brook, or with the shimmer of sun on blue water. It bring meek and inspir from the decenc of nature, chariti toward tackle-makers, patienc toward fish, a mockeri of profit and egos, a quiet of hate, a rejoic that you do not have to decid a darn thing until next week. And it is disciplin in the equal of men — for all men ar equal befor fish.” —Herbert Hoover, avid fly fishermen While spin cast with a spin reel is a great introduct to fishing, mani angler would argu fly fish elev thi pastim into a real art. Why is this? What ar the differences? When it come to the practicalities, the differ ar many. To name just a few, in fly fishing: the rod ar lightweight and much longer the bait (or “fly”) is super lightweight, artificial, and meant to imit food (rather than us live bait or heavi lures) the line itself is heavier, and is what provid the weight to cast, versu the bait or lure itself you’re typic fish in move water (and often in the water) vs. the still water of lake you’re almost constantli in motion rather than just sit on a boat wait for a bobber to dip; your arm get a good workout Beyond the practic differences, fly fish is often label as the purer form. It requir craftsmanship and true skill to cast your line, the fli themselv ar work of art, and as we’ll see, you becom a true master of the environment. When I ask my guid why fly fish, he grin like the answer wa obviou and said, “Why wouldn’t you?” With spin reel fishing, the goal is often a combin of relax and volum — catch as mani fish as you can while have a nice out on a boat or sit in a chair on the shoreline. It’ just easier. With fly fishing, it’ more of a challenge. Can you trick the fish into bite onto your fly/hook? Not onli that, can you successfulli get the fish hook at the right moment, and teas it into your hands/net? Can you navig the stream, and know exactli where to place (or “present”) your fly, so the fish ar most like to bite? All of thi is why you see romant stori (and even philosophi books!) about fly fishing; it’ just a more poetic and art form of the sport. Now that we know the “why,” let’ get more into the “how.” What Kind of Gear Do You Need? fly fish gear and cloth While you don’t need everyth pictur abov when you’re first start with fly fishing, thi give you a gener overview of the kind of thing you’ll like eventu acquir and take with you as you get more into it. For a full descript of each item pictured, click here. When you think of fishing, and especi get start with it, you like think of all the stuff you’ll need to be successful. When I first got to the fly fish shop and my guid wa walk through all the gear we’d be take advantag of, I wa a littl bit intimidated. There were multipl type and weight of line used, a case full of fli (rang in size from a pinki nail to finger-length), gel to coat and waterproof the fly, tool and cutter for knot-ti and knot-untangling, not to mention waders, vests, and other cloth essentials. I think my guid saw my wide eyes, becaus he then said, “Really, you don’t need thi much stuff to start. Grab a pole, some line, and some flies, throw it in the water, and see what happens.” He then told me the stori of a kid in town he knew who would tie some line to a stick, tie on a fly, and drop it in the water — and he’d catch some fish to boot. Lik with anything, when you embrac fly fish you’ll like end up with plenti of special gear, but you don’t need all that when you’re first start out. Fli assort of fly fish fli lure Sourc Fly fish get it name from the bait that is used: artifici “flies” made to imit what the fish ar eat — bug usual (like variou type of . . . you guess it, flies!), but sometim even small rodent and other creatures. There ar numer type and size of fli — dry flies, nymphs, streamer — and what you us will depend on the fish you’re try to catch and your setting. If the fish aren’t biting, you’ll often chang out a fly and try to intuit what thei might be after that dai or season. Thi is why fly fishermen ar often amateur ichthyologist (fish scientists) and entomologist (insect scientists). Thei know type of fish, what those fish eat in what season, what the bug look like at differ time of the year, etc. My guide’ biolog knowledg after year of fish wa truli astounding. improv clinch knot fly fish how-to diagram Sourc Once you can determin the right fly to use, there ar a coupl differ accept knot for attach that fly to your line, but the “improv clinch knot” seem to a favorit among a lot of experts. Check out thi guid to not onli that knot, but a hand of other us in fly fish as well. dii homemad fish fly lure A great closeup of a homemad fly. You can see the color thread carefulli wrap about the hook, with feather and hair attach to creat that bug-lik look. Once you explor fly fishing, you’ll like hear about folk who ar “fly tying.” Thi is not a term for ty your fly to your line (a I initi and veri naiv thought), but rather a term for make your own fli rather than bui them. You’d do thi to possibl save monei (fli ar easi to lose in tree or to rowdi fish), but also for the art of it. Fli truli ar work of art, creat with variou materi like beads, foams, anim hairs, and much more. The beginn angler will not be fly tying; there ar liter book written on the craft, and it requir a whole other set of tool and skills. Thi is someth to look into after you’ve gotten the hang of the fish itself. Cast and Catch The GIF abov is from an Orvi instruct video. Thei have dozen of fly fish video for you to peruse. Once you have your gear and fly all set, it’ time to cast. When you watch season fly fishermen in action on the stream, it’ like see art in motion. The wai the arm moves, follow by the line and fly, so delic place on the water exactli where it’ wanted. Let me tell ya, that’ not what it look like for the rank beginner. So here’ the scoop on fly casting: find someon to teach you. That’ truli the key. I could try to describ in text and illustr how it happens, but that’ just not go to work. For thi article, I actual research the viabil of put togeth an illustr guid on casting. But when I saw other guid that were out there and folk try to describ it, I actual got more confus than when I wa with my guid and try it out with a rod in hand. There ar too mani type of casting, too mani subtl motion and arm movements, and too mani wai to make mistak for me to try to relat that all to you here on a website. Of all the project and skill I’ve written about for the Art of Manliness, thi is the on that most need to be learn in the flesh, either from a friend or famili member who fishes, or from an expert who you’ve paid to help guid you along. The same goe for hook and ultim catch the fish. There’ a whole terminolog that goe into cast and catching: Present Monofila Strike Indicat Set the hook Leader Tippet Riffl And thi is just a small sample. You don’t want to be wade into those water on your own — liter or metaphorically. So, how doe the beginn actual go about get started? Let’ take a look at that next. Tip for Get Started: A Linear Progress Tak a class. Chanc ar high that no matter where you live, some outfitt is offer a class on fly fishing. Be it a sport good store, a dedic fly fish shop, or even a commun college, there ar a lot of place put on free (or low-cost) class to learn the art. Orvi is a great place to look — thei offer free class in 42 states. Thei tend to start with a lectur portion on what I’ve cover abov (but more in-depth), follow by hands-on instruct about lines, knots, flies, and casting. Depend on the shop, they’ll also have next-level classes, which sometim includ practic in a stock pond. man cast fly into east river colorado fly fish Cast a line into the East River near Crest Butte, CO. I had a great experi with Almont Anglers; give ’em a shout if you’re in the area! Hir a guide. After you’ve taken a class or two, hire yourself a guid to take you on a half-dai or full-dai out on the water. (If, that is, you don’t have an experienc friend or famili member will to take you and show you the ropes.) You can onli learn so much in a classroom setting, even if there is some hands-on instruct involved. There’ noth like be in the stream and see what a season vet doe in regard to which fli to use, where to cast, how he troubleshoot things, etc. I would recommend go in that order of take a class first befor hire a guide. I did not do that, and about half of our half-dai togeth wa spent teach me the rope and practic in a pond, which like could have all been accomplish beforehand. A guid can be expens — look to spend $150-$500 depend on your location, and whether you’re do a full-dai or half-dai outing. Mak for a great gift to save up for if that’ a littl out of reach. Practic ty your knot and casting. While not on the water, you can practic a few thing at home. First, work on your knots; line and fli (which ar often tiny) need ty together, and it’ onli with plenti of practic that you can do so deftli and efficiently. My guid could rig up a fly in less than 30 seconds, while I wa fumbl with what felt like sausag finger for a coupl minut befor get it just right. That doesn’t seem like much time, but when you’re out in the river, it add up. Plus, if you’re fumbl with your fly in the water, drop it mean lose a coupl buck right then and there. Along with the guid list abov in the “Flies” section, Orvi also ha a good encyclopedia of knot that on might us while fly fishing. (Thei truli ar a gold mine of fly fish info and instruction.) You can also practic cast at home, though it’ admittedli a littl tougher becaus you need adequ room to do it. If your drivewai or backyard is long enough, start there. If you don’t have room at home, go to a larg park, or even a lake to practic your casting, with actual fish be a secondari pursuit to your practic efforts. Start in lakes. While fly fish is gener pictur as take place in streams, plenti of fishermen practic their craft in lakes. Especial here in Colorado, it’ rather common to see gui (and gals) wade into cold mountain lakes. For the beginner, that’ go to be the easier rout to go for on main reason: it’ just easier to keep an ey on your fly when the water is still. When fly fishing, there’ no bobber or super obviou jump on the line to cue you into a fish be hooked. Rather, you have to carefulli watch your fly and line, and tug up when you see or feel slight movement in order to hook the fish (call “set the hook”). In a flow river or creek, when your fly and line is drift and undul with the current, it’ realli hard to tell if that gentl tug on the line is a fish, or just a rock, or even the tug of the water itself. Start in lake to realli get the hang of things. Prepar to practice. A lot. I ask my guid about how long it took him to realli master all thi stuff, and he said it happen in phases. First you get good at cast and ty your knots, then you get good at notic when a fish ha shown interest in your fly, then you get good at set the hook, then you get good at successfulli reel in and nab your fish, and final onc you have all that stuff taken care of, you can pai attent to the scienc of the fish and bugs, and know how to read the water and your environs. So, be prepar to try a lot, and fail a lot, befor get to a point of truli be comfort in the water. Previou Post Next Post Daili Weekli Daili Weekli aom-podcast-big-button new Random Post Podcast Man Knowledg RECOMMENDED FOR YOU Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com AddThi CONTACT ADVERTISE LEGAL COMMENT POLICY The Art of Manli Copyright © 2018 All Right Reserv Built with iTheme Builder on WordPress by Screen Four A Man’ Lif Dress & Groom Manli Skill Relationship & Famili Health & Sport Shop Mor Strenuouslif 1.9K SHARES 1.9K SHARES Focu Retriev HOME A MAN'S LIFE STYLE & GROOMING HEALTH & SPORTS MANLY SKILLS MONEY & CAREER RELATIONSHIPS & FAMILY PODCAST SHOP MORE SEARCH Jeremi Anderberg | October 18, 2017 Last updated: Mai 28, 2018 Manli Skills, Outdoor How to Get Start With Fly Fish vintag man fly fish in river Fish with a rod and line, and an artifici lightweight lure made to imit fish prei — that is, fly fish — wa first record around the year 200. And while modern innov ha improv the qualiti and durabl of the materials, the basic of the sport and pastim have remain larg the same. Attach a lure (or “fly”) to a line, cast it in the water, and see what happens. Grow up, I fish in a boat with my uncl everi now and then, but didn’t take it up on my own beyond that. Ever sinc move to Colorado 5 year ago, though, I’ve been intrigu by fly fishing. You see fishermen in nearli everi stream you pass by, and our famili often encount them on the trail we traverse. It seem like such an eleg wai to pass the time and settl your mind, while also fulfil the ancient role of Provider. So over Labor Day, I final decid to hire a guid and learn the ropes. Below, I’ll share those rope with you: why you’d choos fly fish over other methods, gear to look for, fly and cast basics, and final some concret tip on actual get yourself start with thi age-old pursuit. Keep in mind thi is a guid for folk who have either never fly fished, or have onli done so a small hand of time and with littl knowledge. It’ for men who’ve want to get into fly fishing, but haven’t known where to begin. If that’ you, I hope thi guid can point you in the right direction. Why Fly Fish? What Distinguish It From Other Typ of Fishing? “To go fish is the chanc to wash one’ soul with pure air, with the rush of the brook, or with the shimmer of sun on blue water. It bring meek and inspir from the decenc of nature, chariti toward tackle-makers, patienc toward fish, a mockeri of profit and egos, a quiet of hate, a rejoic that you do not have to decid a darn thing until next week. And it is disciplin in the equal of men — for all men ar equal befor fish.” —Herbert Hoover, avid fly fishermen While spin cast with a spin reel is a great introduct to fishing, mani angler would argu fly fish elev thi pastim into a real art. Why is this? What ar the differences? When it come to the practicalities, the differ ar many. To name just a few, in fly fishing: the rod ar lightweight and much longer the bait (or “fly”) is super lightweight, artificial, and meant to imit food (rather than us live bait or heavi lures) the line itself is heavier, and is what provid the weight to cast, versu the bait or lure itself you’re typic fish in move water (and often in the water) vs. the still water of lake you’re almost constantli in motion rather than just sit on a boat wait for a bobber to dip; your arm get a good workout Beyond the practic differences, fly fish is often label as the purer form. It requir craftsmanship and true skill to cast your line, the fli themselv ar work of art, and as we’ll see, you becom a true master of the environment. When I ask my guid why fly fish, he grin like the answer wa obviou and said, “Why wouldn’t you?” With spin reel fishing, the goal is often a combin of relax and volum — catch as mani fish as you can while have a nice out on a boat or sit in a chair on the shoreline. It’ just easier. With fly fishing, it’ more of a challenge. Can you trick the fish into bite onto your fly/hook? Not onli that, can you successfulli get the fish hook at the right moment, and teas it into your hands/net? Can you navig the stream, and know exactli where to place (or “present”) your fly, so the fish ar most like to bite? All of thi is why you see romant stori (and even philosophi books!) about fly fishing; it’ just a more poetic and art form of the sport. Now that we know the “why,” let’ get more into the “how.” What Kind of Gear Do You Need? fly fish gear and cloth While you don’t need everyth pictur abov when you’re first start with fly fishing, thi give you a gener overview of the kind of thing you’ll like eventu acquir and take with you as you get more into it. For a full descript of each item pictured, click here. When you think of fishing, and especi get start with it, you like think of all the stuff you’ll need to be successful. When I first got to the fly fish shop and my guid wa walk through all the gear we’d be take advantag of, I wa a littl bit intimidated. There were multipl type and weight of line used, a case full of fli (rang in size from a pinki nail to finger-length), gel to coat and waterproof the fly, tool and cutter for knot-ti and knot-untangling, not to mention waders, vests, and other cloth essentials. I think my guid saw my wide eyes, becaus he then said, “Really, you don’t need thi much stuff to start. Grab a pole, some line, and some flies, throw it in the water, and see what happens.” He then told me the stori of a kid in town he knew who would tie some line to a stick, tie on a fly, and drop it in the water — and he’d catch some fish to boot. Lik with anything, when you embrac fly fish you’ll like end up with plenti of special gear, but you don’t need all that when you’re first start out. Fli assort of fly fish fli lure Sourc Fly fish get it name from the bait that is used: artifici “flies” made to imit what the fish ar eat — bug usual (like variou type of . . . you guess it, flies!), but sometim even small rodent and other creatures. There ar numer type and size of fli — dry flies, nymphs, streamer — and what you us will depend on the fish you’re try to catch and your setting. If the fish aren’t biting, you’ll often chang out a fly and try to intuit what thei might be after that dai or season. Thi is why fly fishermen ar often amateur ichthyologist (fish scientists) and entomologist (insect scientists). Thei know type of fish, what those fish eat in what season, what the bug look like at differ time of the year, etc. My guide’ biolog knowledg after year of fish wa truli astounding. improv clinch knot fly fish how-to diagram Sourc Once you can determin the right fly to use, there ar a coupl differ accept knot for attach that fly to your line, but the “improv clinch knot” seem to a favorit among a lot of experts. Check out thi guid to not onli that knot, but a hand of other us in fly fish as well. dii homemad fish fly lure A great closeup of a homemad fly. You can see the color thread carefulli wrap about the hook, with feather and hair attach to creat that bug-lik look. Once you explor fly fishing, you’ll like hear about folk who ar “fly tying.” Thi is not a term for ty your fly to your line (a I initi and veri naiv thought), but rather a term for make your own fli rather than bui them. You’d do thi to possibl save monei (fli ar easi to lose in tree or to rowdi fish), but also for the art of it. Fli truli ar work of art, creat with variou materi like beads, foams, anim hairs, and much more. The beginn angler will not be fly tying; there ar liter book written on the craft, and it requir a whole other set of tool and skills. Thi is someth to look into after you’ve gotten the hang of the fish itself. Cast and Catch The GIF abov is from an Orvi instruct video. Thei have dozen of fly fish video for you to peruse. Once you have your gear and fly all set, it’ time to cast. When you watch season fly fishermen in action on the stream, it’ like see art in motion. The wai the arm moves, follow by the line and fly, so delic place on the water exactli where it’ wanted. Let me tell ya, that’ not what it look like for the rank beginner. So here’ the scoop on fly casting: find someon to teach you. That’ truli the key. I could try to describ in text and illustr how it happens, but that’ just not go to work. For thi article, I actual research the viabil of put togeth an illustr guid on casting. But when I saw other guid that were out there and folk try to describ it, I actual got more confus than when I wa with my guid and try it out with a rod in hand. There ar too mani type of casting, too mani subtl motion and arm movements, and too mani wai to make mistak for me to try to relat that all to you here on a website. Of all the project and skill I’ve written about for the Art of Manliness, thi is the on that most need to be learn in the flesh, either from a friend or famili member who fishes, or from an expert who you’ve paid to help guid you along. The same goe for hook and ultim catch the fish. There’ a whole terminolog that goe into cast and catching: Present Monofila Strike Indicat Set the hook Leader Tippet Riffl And thi is just a small sample. You don’t want to be wade into those water on your own — liter or metaphorically. So, how doe the beginn actual go about get started? Let’ take a look at that next. Tip for Get Started: A Linear Progress Tak a class. Chanc ar high that no matter where you live, some outfitt is offer a class on fly fishing. Be it a sport good store, a dedic fly fish shop, or even a commun college, there ar a lot of place put on free (or low-cost) class to learn the art. Orvi is a great place to look — thei offer free class in 42 states. Thei tend to start with a lectur portion on what I’ve cover abov (but more in-depth), follow by hands-on instruct about lines, knots, flies, and casting. Depend on the shop, they’ll also have next-level classes, which sometim includ practic in a stock pond. man cast fly into east river colorado fly fish Cast a line into the East River near Crest Butte, CO. I had a great experi with Almont Anglers; give ’em a shout if you’re in the area! Hir a guide. After you’ve taken a class or two, hire yourself a guid to take you on a half-dai or full-dai out on the water. (If, that is, you don’t have an experienc friend or famili member will to take you and show you the ropes.) You can onli learn so much in a classroom setting, even if there is some hands-on instruct involved. There’ noth like be in the stream and see what a season vet doe in regard to which fli to use, where to cast, how he troubleshoot things, etc. I would recommend go in that order of take a class first befor hire a guide. I did not do that, and about half of our half-dai togeth wa spent teach me the rope and practic in a pond, which like could have all been accomplish beforehand. A guid can be expens — look to spend $150-$500 depend on your location, and whether you’re do a full-dai or half-dai outing. Mak for a great gift to save up for if that’ a littl out of reach. Practic ty your knot and casting. While not on the water, you can practic a few thing at home. First, work on your knots; line and fli (which ar often tiny) need ty together, and it’ onli with plenti of practic that you can do so deftli and efficiently. My guid could rig up a fly in less than 30 seconds, while I wa fumbl with what felt like sausag finger for a coupl minut befor get it just right. That doesn’t seem like much time, but when you’re out in the river, it add up. Plus, if you’re fumbl with your fly in the water, drop it mean lose a coupl buck right then and there. Along with the guid list abov in the “Flies” section, Orvi also ha a good encyclopedia of knot that on might us while fly fishing. (Thei truli ar a gold mine of fly fish info and instruction.) You can also practic cast at home, though it’ admittedli a littl tougher becaus you need adequ room to do it. If your drivewai or backyard is long enough, start there. If you don’t have room at home, go to a larg park, or even a lake to practic your casting, with actual fish be a secondari pursuit to your practic efforts. Start in lakes. While fly fish is gener pictur as take place in streams, plenti of fishermen practic their craft in lakes. Especial here in Colorado, it’ rather common to see gui (and gals) wade into cold mountain lakes. For the beginner, that’ go to be the easier rout to go for on main reason: it’ just easier to keep an ey on your fly when the water is still. When fly fishing, there’ no bobber or super obviou jump on the line to cue you into a fish be hooked. Rather, you have to carefulli watch your fly and line, and tug up when you see or feel slight movement in order to hook the fish (call “set the hook”). In a flow river or creek, when your fly and line is drift and undul with the current, it’ realli hard to tell if that gentl tug on the line is a fish, or just a rock, or even the tug of the water itself. Start in lake to realli get the hang of things. Prepar to practice. A lot. I ask my guid about how long it took him to realli master all thi stuff, and he said it happen in phases. First you get good at cast and ty your knots, then you get good at notic when a fish ha shown interest in your fly, then you get good at set the hook, then you get good at successfulli reel in and nab your fish, and final onc you have all that stuff taken care of, you can pai attent to the scienc of the fish and bugs, and know how to read the water and your environs. So, be prepar to try a lot, and fail a lot, befor get to a point of truli be comfort in the water. Previou Post Next Post Daili Weekli Daili Weekli aom-podcast-big-button new Random Post Podcast Man Knowledg RECOMMENDED FOR YOU Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli Men' Complaint About Women 50 Year Ago | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli The Archetyp of Manli | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli How to REALLY Avoid Liv a Lif of Quiet Desper | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli Becom Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resili | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli Lif Lesson From Atticu Finch | The Art of Manli www.artofmanliness.com AddThi CONTACT ADVERTISE LEGAL COMMENT POLICY The Art of Manli Copyright © 2018 All Right Reserv Built with iTheme Builder on WordPress by Screen Four A Man’ Lif Dress & Groom Manli Skill Relationship & Famili Health & Sport Shop Mor Strenuouslif 1.9K SHARES 1.9K SHARES Focu Retriev 

Free 2-Dai Ship on Order Over $50 My Account Chat 1-800-409-4502 Search gear & cloth Gearhead New Arrival Brand Activiti Women Men Kid Sal Tak 15% Off Your First Order! Join our email list and save. Discount appli in cart. ex: joe@gmail.com Exclusion apply. See details. Photo Credit: Re Wikstrom Comment Share Top POSTED BYCurti Jensen Most Popular Lov Your Puffy: How To Car For Your Down Jacket How To Build Your First Trad Rack Canyon 101: Get Start What Is A Plu Bike, And Is It For You? How To Choos A Backpack Pack Fly Fish 101: An Intro to Fli post on April 21, 2014 Fish fli ar bait design to imit insects, invertebrates, baitfish, crustaceans, small animals, and other fish fodder. Traditionally, fli were “tied” with natur materi like feathers, thread, and anim fur or hair. Now, a rang of synthet and natur materi ar used, sometim on the same fly. Fli fall into roughli five categories: dry flies, wet flies, streamers, poppers, and saltwat flies. dryflieslayout2 Dry Fli Dry fli ar fish on or at the surfac of water and typic imit adult or emerg insect like mayflies, caddisflies, stoneflies, midges, grasshoppers, and damselflies. Fli ar ti in patterns, gener recip for specif type of imitations. Dry fli ar thought by some (especi those in the Walton tradition) to be as good as it get in fly fish becaus the fish’ take is visual, requir accur cast and delic presentation. Most good dry fly fish requir a set of veri specif conditions, condit which don’t alwai materialize. But when condit ar right, sai a hatch of adult Blue Wing Olive mayfli come off a western trout stream on an overcast dai in earli spring, the fish can be electric. Medium- to slow-act rod put dry fli on the water more delic than faster actions, and so a grow number of dry-fli purist prefer bamboo rods. wetflieslayout1 Wet Fli Wet fli ar fish below the surface, and ar ti to imit thing like pupal- and nymph-stag aquat insects, scud (freshwat shrimp), fish eggs, worms, and crayfish. ‘Nymphing‘ is a type of trout fish us wet fli suspend in move water, with weight ad to sink the rig to the fish’ feed depth. The strike happen below the water’ surface, so the fly fisher must see (more like sense) the strike by watch for line movement at the surfac or fish flash below the surface. Som nymph rig us strike indic (flyspeak for ‘bobbers’), made of yarn, foam, or plastic, to help the fly fisher see the strike. Czech Nymph or high-stick us weight suspend below the nymphs, with the fly fisher rais the rod tip as the line pass down current to keep the drift rig rel straight and in the feed lane. Cast nymph rig is not usual graceful; becaus of ad weight and strike indicators, the tradit backcast becom more of a chuck-and-duck lob. Trout spend most of their time feed underwater, so, grace or not, nymph is often the most effect techniqu for cold-wat species, especi when condit ar off for dry fly fishing. One-hand rod 9 feet or longer make for easier mend (adjust to the drift of a nymph rig by lift the line in the current). Streamer Streamer ar larger wet fli ti to imit baitfish, leeches, crayfish, and other small animals. Streamer ar typic fish like lures; the fly fisher retriev or strip in the lure to imit prey. Fish hit streamer hard; strike with streamer tend to be territori or predatory, and usual violent. Think big brown rip up deer hair mice pattern after dark. Doesn’t get much more fun than that. Streamer ar fish with one- or two-hand rods, and can be effect for essenti ani type of fish in almost ani condition. Even in the most technic dry-fli fishing, most fish will give a well-pres streamer a good look, especi larger, predatori fish. BCRE_120531-0004 Popper Popper ar blunt- or scoop-head fli fish on the surfac of water with quick strip and twitches, imit wound baitfish, frogs, mice, and other small prei animals. Popper were borrow directli from the baitcast crowd—bass and warm-wat speci love these flies. Largemouth bass ar known for their explos take on poppers—th boil look like a toilet flushing. Saltwat Fli Saltwat fli ar ani fli us to fish for marin speci of fish, and as such span a huge rang of size and shapes. Most saltwat fli ar wet fli ti to imit crabs, shrimp, and baitfish. Saltwat pattern borrow heavili from streamer and poppers, though ar typic much larger than their freshwat counterparts. Within these five basic type of flies, there ar sever differ type of pattern and thousand of pattern variations. The type of fly you choos will depend on the type of fish you’re after, the season, the region, and the water. Relat Fly Fish 101: An Intro to Techniqu How to Choos a Fly Rod How to Choos a Fly Reel Shop Fly Fish Fli Fly Fish Gear & Apparel flyfishing101-flies_larg 1Comment Here' what the commun ha to say. John S. John S. Juli 2, 2014 Lov that BC is now sell fly fish gear. Thi articl in particular is a great intro for peopl who ar just start out and look to get involved. I would add that if you ar new to the game, get a fast-act 9ft 5wt rod. You can do 95% of your freshwat fish with a 9' 5wt. (1) Need Help? Talk to our Gearhead 24/7 about your needs. Call: 1.800.409.4502 Stai In The Know Sign Up For Backcountri News, Sal And Deal Put A Goat On It Helmet, bumper, you name it. Put a goat on it. Send Me A Sticker Giv a Friend $10, Get $10 Refer Your Friend Gift Certif e-Gift Certif Classic Gift Card Popular Pag Hom Resourc Creat a Wed Registri Return Order Statu Sal Item Polici Sal Tax Polici Term of Use Privaci Polici Internat Ship Polici Learn Resourc Gift Card Term & Condit About Backcountri About Backcountri Press Releas Group Sal Land Your Dream Job Affiliat Program Sit Map What' Wrong with thi Page? Download the Backcountri App . © Backcountry.com – All Right Reserv Backcountry.com 

Find A Store My Account Bass Pro Shop Logo Cart Custom Servic Bass Pro Shop CLUB Gift Card Store & Sal Flyer All Search Suggest site content and search histori menu Search Shop Depart 1Sourc – New & Tip Store Boat & ATV Resort & Restaur FISHING NEWS & TIPS BASS CATFISH CRAPPIE EXERCISE & WORKOUTS FISH & WATER CONSERVATION FISH RECIPES FISHING FISHING EVENTS FISHING GEAR FISHING INFORMATION FISHING KNOTS: HOW TO TIE FISHING ROD & REEL REPAIR FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS FLY FISHING FLY TYING ICE FISHING INTERNATIONAL FISHING MUSKIE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER TARPON TAXIDERMY TROUT WALLEYE VIDEOS BASS CATFISH COOKING FISH CRAPPIE FISHING KNOTS FISHING PRODUCTS FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS & EVENTS FLY FISHING GENERAL FISHING ICE FISHING MUSKIE NATURE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER SNOOK STURGEON TROUT WALLEYE BRAGGIN' BOARD BASS CATFISH COOKING FISH CRAPPIE FISHING KNOTS FISHING PRODUCTS FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS & EVENTS FLY FISHING GENERAL FISHING ICE FISHING MUSKIE NATURE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER SNOOK STURGEON TROUT WALLEYE FISHING MAPS PLACES TO FISH & BOAT MEMBER LOGINMEMBER LOGIN REGISTER BOATING NEWS & TIPS BOAT MAINTENANCE BOAT RIGGING BOATING INFORMATION CANOEING KAYAKING VIDEOS BOAT ACCESSORIES BOAT MAINTENANCE BOATING EVENTS BOATING INFORMATION BOATING SAFETY TIPS CANOE KAYAKING MY BOAT WATER SPORTS BRAGGN' BOARD BOAT ACCESSORIES BOAT MAINTENANCE BOATING EVENTS BOATING INFORMATION BOATING SAFETY TIPS CANOE KAYAKING MY BOAT WATER SPORTS HUNTING NEWS & TIPS ALL HUNTING ARCHERY BEAR BIG GAME BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING DEER DOVE DUCK ELK EXERCISE & WORKOUTS FIREARMS GAME PROCESSING GAME RECIPES GOOSE GROUSE HABITAT & WILDLIFE CONSERVATION HABITATS & FOOD PLOTS HUNTING DOGS HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION PHEASANT PREDATOR QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY TURKEY UPLAND HUNTING VARMINT WATERFOWL GEAR & TECHNIQUE WILD HOGS & BOAR VIDEOS ARCHERY ARCHERY TRICK SHOTS BEAR BIG GAME BIRD BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING COOKING WILD GAME DEER DUCK ELK GATOR GOOSE GROUSE HUNTING DOG HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION LAND / HABITAT MANAGEMENT PHEASANT PREDATOR PRONGHORN QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY HUNTING GAME TURKEY TURKEY ROOST BY CABELA'S WILD HOG / BOAR BRAGGIN' BOARD ARCHERY ARCHERY TRICK SHOTS BEAR BIG GAME BIRD BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING COOKING WILD GAME DEER DUCK ELK GATOR GOOSE GROUSE HUNTING DOG HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION LAND / HABITAT MANAGEMENT PHEASANT PREDATOR PRONGHORN QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY HUNTING GAME TURKEY TURKEY ROOST BY CABELA'S WILD HOG / BOAR DEER NATION VIDEO PREP GEAR HUNT NEWS CAMPING NEWS & TIPS BACKPACKING BIRD WATCHING CAMPING DESTINATIONS CAMPING EQUIPMENT CAMPING INFORMATION CAVING EXERCISE & WORKOUTS HIKING OUTDOOR COOKING OUTDOOR EVENTS OUTDOOR GEAR OUTDOOR INFORMATION RV CAMPING ROPE KNOT LIBRARY SURVIVAL INFORMATION WHITEWATER VIDEOS CAMP COOKING CAMPING OUTDOOR OUTDOOR EVENTS BRAGGIN' BOARD CAMP COOKING CAMPING OUTDOOR OUTDOOR EVENTS COMMUNITY NEWS & TIPS VIDEOS BRAGGIN' BOARD MEMBER AREA FORUM BASS PRO NEWS COOK WITH CABELA'S Search... Search 1Source... SEARCH Advanc Search + A Simpl Guid to Choos Your First Fly Fish Outfit Post by Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc Jun 27, 2017 Publish in New & Tip > Fish > Fly Fish My Favorit 1 0 4618 Comment Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc expert Whether you're new to fly fish or just want to know more about fly fish thi guid will help you get start in select the basic collect of fish accessori includ the right fly fish gear, select flies, leaders, fly line, fly rod and reel. So befor you buy, check out these tips. fly fishing-troutAnoth Wai to Fish Fly angl can seem intimid until you understand that it’ just anoth wai to fish. The differ between fly tackl and convent fish gear is how it deliv the lure to the target: Convent Fish Outfits: cast a lure of a given weight, and the line is primarili for get it back (or the fish to the boat). Fly Outfits: cast a fly line of a given weight, and the lure (often weigh practic nothing), is carri to the target by the line. Good caster can liter deliv a feather over a hundr feet with amaz accuracy. As with convent gear, there is a “size” rang of equip for handl everyth from the smallest to the biggest fish (and flies). You must first decid what type of fish you want to catch. Most peopl start with a medium duti outfit in a #5 or #6 weight size. (We’ll get back to “weight”.) A #5 weight outfit is great for pursu trout, bluegill, and small-to-medium size bass. If you ar immedi target redfish, pike, or heftier bass, a #8 weight outfit is a better choice. Outfit rang from nearli impract ultralight #1 weights, to special #15 weight setup for billfish and tuna. Most of the world live between #4 and #9. Lines, rods, and mani reel ar label by weight to assur a perfect match. fly fishing-shop fly rod Fly rod ar fish rod built specif for fly-fish and ar similar to ani fish rod in mani ways, but also veri different. sourc globalflyfisher.com How to Choos a Fly Rod Lik convent rods, fly rodsvari in price. The most import differ ar in the materi the blank is made with. The cheapest fly rod us inexpens fiberglass, and tend to have a veri soft action. The price increas with the us of better fiberglass, glass/graphit composites, and then graphit rang from less expens lower-modulu materi to expens high-modulu aerospac materials. (Modulu is a measur of a fiber’ strength in relat to it weight and mass.) Other factor that add to the price of a rod include: Mor and better guid Fancier reel seats, us exot wood and machin metal instead of plastic High-qual cork Rod sock and tube Research, development, tool costs, and labor Brand recognit Rfly fisherod action rang from slow (softer), to fast (stiffer), and ar a matter of person preference. The most import thing is make sure the line match the rod. The length and line weight ar print on the rod. “What is a five weight?”—Fli rod, reel, and line “weights” 3 and 4 Lin Weight: Perfect for the light-tackl enthusiast. Best with small fli for panfish and trout at short range. The ultim for sensit and delic fly presentation. 5 and 6 Lin Weight: The most versatil line weights. Compat with float or sink lines, dry flies, or bass bugs. A 5 weight is best for trout and panfish only. To add bass, small steelhead, and salmon to your quarry, a 6 weight is the right choice. 7 and 8 Lin Weight: A pleasur to cast at medium and long range. These line weight work with float or sink line and ar best for larg fli and larg fish—bass, pike, salmon, and inshor saltwat species. “How long should my fly rod be?” 7–7-1/2 ft. Fly Rod Length: Availabl in lighter line weight to maxim accuraci and sensit at short range. Great for fish tight cover, spring creeks, small streams, and ponds. 8 ft. Fly Rod Length: Maximum accuraci for short- and middle-rang casting. Best for small or medium rivers, and ponds. A good choic when cast space is confined. 8-1/2 ft. Fly Rod Length: A versatil length, at home on all size of river as well as still water. Increas accuraci for middl and longrang casting. Also effect at short range. 9 ft. Fly Rod Length: Maximum overal line control. Effectiv cast all distances. Best for medium and larg rivers, from float tubes, boats, or anywher cast space is unobstructed. fly reel Fly reel have five major design components: an extern frame for endurance, a reel foot for easi attach to the fly rod, an arbor for line storage, dispensing, and retrieval, an intern drag system to help an angler maintain fight pressure. How to Select Your Fly Reel Fly reel serv a differ role than convent reels. Mostli thei serv to store unus line. Usually, a workabl amount of line is strip from the reel, and manag by hand while fishing. Fly angler retriev their lure by hand-strip them in. A fly reel is not us for fish out a cast, i.e. cast and retrieving. In most cases, includ big game fly fishing, the reel ha a 1:1 gear ratio. The least expens fly reel ar made of plastic, and while OK to start with, ar not veri durable. Diecast metal reel ar the next step up in price and ruggedness. The highest-qu reel ar machin from bar stock aluminum. Reel ascend in price due to other factors: Corrosion-resist hard anod finish Extensiv finishing, insid and out Use of high-qual gear and bear Sophist drag system Research, development, tool costs, and labor Brand recognit When angl for trout, the drag need onli offer light but smooth resist to protect the light leader used. A smooth click and pawl system work fine here, howev more and more trout-siz reel ar offer disk drags. Whichev you choose, the kei is “smooth”. For longer run fish on heavier leaders, like steelhead, bonefish, etc., the drag becom more critical, and disk drag becom the prefer design. Nonetheless, “smooth” and reliabl ar the 2 critic factors. At thi level (8 weight on up), you might consid spend more on your reel than your rod. How to Pick the Right Fly Lin fly line taperYour fly fish line ha to match your rod. If your rod is a 5 weight, you must have a 5 weight line. Lin weight is quantifi by the weight of the front 30 feet of fly line. The front 30 feet of a 6 weight line weigh slightli more than a 5 weight, and so on. The flex of a rod is design to cast a certain weight line. As with convent rods, try to throw more weight or less weight than what the rod is design for just doesn’t work well. Heavier line will carri out heavier flies, and do better in wind. Bass bugger prefer 8–9 weight outfit for thi reason. Regardless of how a line is marketed, line box ar alwai label (coded) with their taper, weight, and whether thei float or sink. “WF5F” describ a weight forward taper, 5-weight floater. At thi time weight forward taper line ar the most common, follow by doubl tapers. Even when fish with nymph and other submerg fli you will us a float line most of the time. maxima leader flyfish Maximum Leader Wheel How to Pick the Right Fly Leader The fly leader is your connect between the fly line and your fly. Most often it is monofilament, and taper from a thicker butt section on the line end, to a thinner tip which is ti to the fly. Length of leader will vary, with the most common size be 7-1/2 to 9 feet. There ar variou wai to attach the leader to the fly line. The simplest and most effici connect is a Nail Knot, which is most easili ti with a tool. Other connect includ braid loop and nylon connectors. When leader packag ar code with a number like “5X”, that refer to the diamet of the thin tip of the leader. Fortun the packag will also give the pound test of the tip section, which is more practic for new fly fishers. egg flyAbout Fli & Match the Hatch Thi is a veri broad subject. A lot of trout fli ar meant to look like insects, henc the term “fly.” Actually, the refer appli to ani phoni food item with a hook in it that ha a good chanc of end up in a fish’ mouth, and can be deliv with fly tackle. We ar talk imit eggs, baitfish, insects, plankton, crustaceans, etc., and ani part thereof. nymph flySom float model that look like adult bug ar refer to as “dry flies.” There ar other subsurfac insect design that ar classifi as “wet flies” or “fish nymphs.” At it simplest, “match the hatch” is find out what the fish ar eating, and then dig through your fly box for someth the right size and shape. Advantag to Bui a Match Fly Fish Outfit fly outfit kit Fly Fish Rod and Reel Outfit with Accessori White River Fly Shops® ha taken much of the guesswork out of shop for an outfit by offer match outfit at a save over individu purchas components. 1 arrow pointTip: Shop fly fish outfit at basspro.com 1 arrow pointTip: Wright & McGill Plung Fly Fish Rod and Reel Outfit With Accessori Select a Basic Collect of Fly Fish Accessori fly accessoriesA you’ve guessed, there ar variou spare parts, gadgets, tools, and substanc that will make your fly angl more productive. Fortun most fly fish accessori inexpensive, and a fly fish vest ha enough pocket for you to organ them all. A basic fly fish collect to start would include: 2–3 size of fly fish leader materi (tippet) nipper like the Dr. Slick Offset Nipper with Hook sharpen for trim mono knot ty tool like the Tie-Fast Knot Tyer for chang leader a box of fli forcep like the White River Fly Shop stainless steel forcep for remov small fish hook strike indic flyfishingTrout fisher can add the following: fly fish strike indic split shot selector like the Spring Creek Shot Assortment fly flotant like the Gink - Dry Fly Floatant shop fly fishingGet Fish Tips, Answere Question & Bui Fly Equipment At your local Bass Pro Shops, the staff of White River Fly Shops® can be of great assist when make your equip and fly selections, and in answer your questions. Fortunately, there ar a lot of great fly fish instruct video and DVD avail to help you master fly casting, knot tying, and even fish techniques. We highli recommend you make the most of these instruct materials. In the long run, your introduct to fly fish and your time on the water will be a lot more fun if you do. Tag underFli Fish Tip Fly Ty Tip Fish Gear How To Guid Read 4618 time Last modifi on Februari 9, 2018 Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc expert Our goal is to provid outdoor industri content that is informational, tell where-to and how-to, present view and opinion from outdoor writer as well as fish and hunt profession includ mani recreat and industri experts. Bass Pro 1Sourc share it fishing, boating, hunt and camp videos, blogs, tips, and new and talk forum with anyon interest in the great outdoors, wildlif and habitat conservation. Mor about Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc » LATEST FROM BASS PRO SHOPS 1SOURCE Mondai Septemb 24, 2018, 6:00 am Pheasant and our Nation Forest Featur on Bass Pro Shop Outdoor World Radio Saturdai Septemb 15, 2018, 6:00 am Celebr Nation Hunt and Fish Dai on Bass Pro Shop Outdoor World Radio RELATED ARTICLES Fridai Juli 6, 2018, 6:30 am Mani Factor Mak Fly Fish for Panfish Appeal Sundai Juli 31, 2016, 7:00 am Hav Som Fun & Fly Fish for Bluegills, The Seasons, The Patterns, The Present You must be sign in to post comment on Bass Pro Shop 1Source. Don't have an account? Pleas join Bass Pro Shop 1Source. COMMENTS Sort by Latest First Sort by Oldest First No comment found back to top Tournament Fish Reward Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc Newslett Sign-up Tournament Fish Reward Bass Pro Shop 1Sourc Newslett Sign-up FISHING TOP SELLERSSHOPLOCATE A STORE 1406110826553 - Z-Man Finess TRD Z-Man Finess TRD $4.29 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100088679 - G. Loomi E6X Cast Rod G. Loomi E6X Cast Rod $199.99 100179633 - Shimano Curado DC Baitcast Reel Shimano Curado DC Baitcast Reel $249.99 10210181 - Bass Pro Shop XPS Tungsten Worm Weight Bass Pro Shop XPS Tungsten Worm Weight $7.29 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 96636 - Strike King Rag Tail Craw Soft Bait Lur Strike King Rag Tail Craw Soft Bait Lur $5.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 58909 - Gari Yamamoto 5'' Senko Gari Yamamoto 5'' Senko $8.79 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 1304170611422 - Bass Pro Shop XPS KVD Signatur Seri 100% Fl… Bass Pro Shop XPS KVD Signatur Seri 100% Fl… $99.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100054092 - Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Cas… Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Cas… $119.99 95625 - Bass Pro Shop 5-3/8'' Stik-O Worm Bass Pro Shop 5-3/8'' Stik-O Worm $9.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 7506 - Zoom 5'' Super Fluke Zoom 5'' Super Fluke $3.69 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100055513 - Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Bai… Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Bai… $209.98 169269 - Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Bai… Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLit 2.0 Bai… $119.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 1208310516498 - Bass Pro Shop Excel Monofila Lin - Jumbo … Bass Pro Shop Excel Monofila Lin - Jumbo … $11.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 44283 - PowerPro 300 Yard Braid Spectra Fiber Micro … PowerPro 300 Yard Braid Spectra Fiber Micro … $62.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10211203 - Z-Man The Origin ChatterBait Z-Man The Origin ChatterBait $5.49 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100055830 - Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLite/CarbonL… Bass Pro Shop Johnni Morri CarbonLite/CarbonL… $169.98 53661 - Gamakatsu EWG Worm Hook Gamakatsu EWG Worm Hook $20.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 161658 - Bass Pro Shop Pro Qualifi 2 Baitcast Reel Bass Pro Shop Pro Qualifi 2 Baitcast Reel $99.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10209674 - Strike King KVD Rattl Squar Bill Crankbait Strike King KVD Rattl Squar Bill Crankbait $13.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100026989 - Abu Garcia Revo X Baitcast Reel Abu Garcia Revo X Baitcast Reel $99.99 168574 - Daiwa Tatula CT Baitcast Reel Daiwa Tatula CT Baitcast Reel $129.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10209675 - Strike King KVD Squar Bill Silent Crankbait Strike King KVD Squar Bill Silent Crankbait $10.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 14071007465716 - YUM Dinger YUM Dinger $3.49 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ Term of Use Privaci Polici Contact Bass Pro 1Sourc Receiv Our Newslett Bass Pro 1Sourc Sitemap Bass Pro Shop Custom Servic Associat Custom Servic 1‑800‑BASSPRO (1‑800‑227‑7776) Email Liv Chat FAQ Return Ship Informat Privaci Polici Accessibl Polici Support ID: ? Recalls/Terms/Disclosur Recal Informat Gift Card Term & Condit CLUB and Outdoor Reward FAQ Term of Use/Commun Guidelin CA TSCA Disclosur Sign Up for Bass Pro Shop Email Bass jump out of phone graphic Email & Text Sign Up Text BASS to 40745 to sign up for mobil alerts. (Messag & data rate mai apply.) Sign Up for Email Resourc Bass Pro 1Sourc — New & Tip Catalog Request Online Catalog Rod & Reel Repair Embroideri Servic Siz Informat Wildlif Creation Sit Index Store Locat Pin Select a Store State/Provinc City/Stor Compani Info Cabela' Boat Servic Center Store Restaur The Bass Pro Shop Stori Our Passion Founder & Conservationist Johnni Morri Conserv & Commun Compani New Wholesal Dealer & Tax Exempt Organiz Career Center Affiliat Program Descriptive, typograph or photograph error ar subject to corrections. VeriSign Secur Sit and BBB Accredited. All price ar in U.S. funds. All page © 2006 – 2018 BPS Direct, L.L.C. All right reserved. If you ar us a screen reader and ar have problem us thi website, pleas call 1-800-227-7776 for assistance. VeriSign Secur Sit and BBB Accredit Sumo Focu Retriev FacebookTwitterPinterestGoogle+EmailSumoM

 Get Licens Learn To Fish & BoatWher To Fish & BoatStat Info How To Fish Saltwat Fish Freshwat Fish Fly Fish Ice Fish Boat How To Catch Fish How To Tie Fish Knot Fish Gear And Tackl View All When To Saltwat Fish Saltwat Bait And Lur Saltwat Fish Tackl View All Best Freshwat Fish When To Freshwat Fish Freshwat Bait And Lur View All Fly Fish Basic Fly Fish Fli Fly Fish Gear View All Ice Fish Basic Ice Fish Gear Ice Fish Techniqu View All Boat Basic How To Boat Boat And Water Safeti View All Fish Speci Smallmouth Bass Coho Salmon Walley View All Tak Me Fish Blog 5 Internat Fish Licens Guidelin to Know Read Articl What Nativ Fish Conserv Mean For Angler Read Articl View Blog View All In Learn To Fish & Boat Select a state to find fish and boat information: ALABAMA ALASKA ARIZONA ARKANSAS CALIFORNIA COLORADO CONNECTICUT DELAWARE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FLORIDA GEORGIA HAWAII IDAHO ILLINOIS INDIANA IOWA KANSAS KENTUCKY LOUISIANA MAINE MARYLAND MASSACHUSETTS MICHIGAN MINNESOTA MISSISSIPPI MISSOURI MONTANA NEBRASKA NEVADA NEW HAMPSHIRE NEW JERSEY NEW MEXICO NEW YORK NORTH CAROLINA NORTH DAKOTA OHIO OKLAHOMA OREGON PENNSYLVANIA RHODE ISLAND SOUTH CAROLINA SOUTH DAKOTA TENNESSEE TEXAS UTAH VERMONT VIRGINIA WASHINGTON WEST VIRGINIA WISCONSIN WYOMING GET A FISHING LICENSE Get start fish today, purchas your fish licens online, check regul and more. REGISTER A BOAT Regist your boat today. Learn how to regist your vessel, boat law and more. CUSTOM SEARCH Hom > Learn to Fish & Boat > Fly Fish Fly Fish Fly fish is fun, relax and easi to learn. You can fly fish anywhere, from the shore of a lake or from a boat on the ocean waves. Get fly fish tip about how to fly cast, choos gear, where to fish and more. GET YOUR FISHING LICENSE REGISTER YOUR BOAT Dry Fly Fish Tip to Use Thi Fall 8 DRY FLY FISHING TIPS TO USE THIS FALL READ MORE Differ fly fish hook size FLY FISHING HOOK SIZES: HOW DO YOU CHOOSE? READ MORE An angler fly fish in toccoa river TOCCOA RIVER FLY FISHING TIPS READ MORE LEARN FLY FISHING BASICS To start fly fish you need a fly rod, a line and some artifici flies. FLY FISHING BASICS reel ROLL CASTING Use the roll cast when there is no room behind. Practic thi cast on the water. reel TYING FLIES Get fly fish basic for ty fli specif to the type of fish you want to catch. reel FLY FISHING RODS Get fly fish tip to learn how to select the best fly fish rod for your next outing. FLY FISHING FLIES Learn more about the differ sizes, color and pattern of fish flies. BEST FISHING FLIES STARTER FISHING FLIES AQUATIC INSECTS SEE ALL FLY FISHING GEAR In fly fishing, have the right gear increas your chanc of success. FLY FISHING RODS FLY FISHING REELS FLY FISHING LINES SEE ALL FLY CASTING The more you practic your technique, the more of a master caster you’ll become. ROLL CASTING TWO STROKE CASTING TIGHT LOOP & OPEN LOOP SEE ALL PLACES TO BOAT AND FISH NEARBY VIEW MAP LICENSE FIRST. BONDING SECOND. Fish is a great wai to bond with your family. But remember, befor you go you need to purchas your fish licens and check your state fish regulations. GET LICENSED Subscrib to our Newslett Email SIGN UP CORPORATE MEDIA CENTER DONATE GET A LICENSE REGISTER YOUR BOAT RECURSOS EN ESPAÑOL CONTACT US FAQ TERMS OF USE RBFF Vamo A Pescar Takemefishing.org ©2018 RBFF. Tak Me Fishing™ is a trademark of the Recreat Boat & Fish Foundation.Al Right Reserv Sport Fish Restor 

Fly fish From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigationJump to search For other uses, see Fly fish (disambiguation). Not to be confus with Rain fish. Fly fish Tempor range: Eocene–Recent[1] PreЄЄOSDCPTJKPgN Sailfin flyingfish.jpg Sailfin flying-fish Parexocoetu brachypteru Scientif classif edit Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Actinopterygii Order: Beloniform Suborder: Belonoidei Superfamily: Exocoetoidea Family: Exocoetida Genera Cheilopogon Cypseluru Exocoetu Fodiat Hirundichthi Parexocoetu Prognichthi The Exocoetida ar a famili of marin fish in the order Beloniform class Actinopterygii. Fish of thi famili ar known as fly fish. About 64 speci ar group in seven to nine genera. Fly fish can make powerful, self-propel leap out of water into air, where their long, wing-lik fin enabl glide flight for consider distanc abov the water' surface. Thi uncommon abil is a natur defenc mechan to evad predators. The oldest known fossil of a fly or glide fish, Potanichthi xingyiensis, date back to the Middl Triassic, 235–242 million year ago. However, thi fossil is not relat to modern fly fish, which evolv independ about 66 million year ago.[2][3] Content 1 Etymolog 2 Distribut and descript 2.1 Flight measur 3 Fisheri and cuisin 4 Importanc 4.1 Tobago 4.1.1 Maritim disput 5 See also 6 Refer 7 External link Etymolog The term Exocoetida is both the scientif name and the gener name in Latin for a fly fish. The suffix -idae, common for indic a family, follow the root of the Latin word exocoetus, a transliter of the Ancient Greek name ἐξώκοιτος. Thi mean liter "sleep outside", from ἔξω "outside" and κοῖτος "bed", "rest place", verb root κει- "to lie down" (not "untruth"),[4] so name as fly fish were believ to leav the water to sleep ashore,[5] or due to fly fish fly and thu strand themselv in boats. A differ etymolog approach is Ancient Greek ἔξω "outside" + κύτος "hull", which mean not submerg in the water. Distribut and descript Fly fish Fly fish take off Fly fish live in all of the oceans, particularli in tropic and warm subtrop waters. Thei ar commonli found in the epipelag zone, the top layer of the ocean to a depth of about 200 m. It is often known as the "sunlight zone" becaus it is where most of the visibl light exists. Nearli all primari production, or photosynthesis, happen in thi zone.[6] Therefore, the vast major of plant and anim inhabit thi area and can vari from plankton to the sharks. Although the epipelag zone is an except area for varieti in life, it also ha it drawbacks. Due to the vast varieti of organisms, high number of prei and predat relationship exist.[7] Small organ such as the fly fish ar target for larger organisms. Thei especi have a hard time escap predat and surviv until thei can reproduce, result in their have a lower fitness.[7] Along with relationship difficulties, abiot factor also plai a part. Harsh ocean current make it extrem difficult for small fish to surviv in thi habitat. Research suggest that difficult environment factor in the fly fish' habitat have led to the evolut of modifi fins.[8] As a result, fly fish have undergon natur select in which speci gain uniqu trait to better adapt to their environments. By becom airborne, fly fish evad their predators. Thi increas of speed and maneuver is a surviv advantag to fly fish when compar to other speci in their environment. It ha also been propos that becom airborn is not sole a predat evas technique, as fly fish have been observ jump from the water in the absenc of predators. Theori includ energi save and introduct to food-rich environ have also been suggested.[7] The fly fish ha undergon morpholog chang throughout it history, the first of which is fulli broaden neural arches, which act as insert site for muscles, connect tissues, and ligament in a fish’ skeleton. Fulli broaden neural arch act as more stabl and sturdier site for these connections, creat a strong link between the vertebr column and cranium.[9] Thi ultim allow a rigid and sturdi vertebr column (body) that is benefici in flight. Hav a rigid bodi dure glide flight give the fly fish aerodynam advantages, increas it speed and improv it aim.[9] Furthermore, fly fish have develop vertebr column and ossifi caudal complexes.[10] These featur provid the major of strength to the fly fish, allow them to physic lift their bodi out of water and glide remark distances. These addit also reduc the flexibl of the fly fish, allow them to perform power leap without weaken midair.[10] At the end of a glide, thei fold their pector fin to re-enter the sea, or drop their tail into the water to push against the water to lift for anoth glide, possibl chang direction.[11][12] The curv profil of the "wing" is compar to the aerodynam shape of a bird wing.[13] The fish is abl to increas it time in the air by fly straight into or at an angl to the direct of updraft creat by a combin of air and ocean currents.[11][12] Speci of genu Exocoetu have on pair of fin and streamlin bodi to optim for speed, while Cypseluru spp. have flatten bodi and two pair of fins, which maxim their time in the air. From 1900 to the 1930s, fly fish were studi as possibl model us to develop airplanes.[12] The Exocoetida feed mainli on plankton. Predat includ dolphins, tuna, marlin, birds, squid, and porpoises.[12] Flight measur In Mai 2008, a Japanes televis crew (NHK) film a fly fish (dub "Icarfish") off the coast of Yakushima Island, Japan. The fish spent 45 second in flight.[14] The previou record wa 42 seconds.[14] The flight of fly fish ar typic around 50 m (160 ft),[15] though thei can us updraft at the lead edg of wave to cover distanc up to 400 m (1,300 ft).[15][16] Thei can travel at speed of more than 70 km/h (43 mph).[12] Maximum altitud is 6 m (20 ft) abov the surfac of the sea.[13] Fly fish often accident land on the deck of smaller vessels.[12][17][18] Fisheri and cuisin Fly fish for sale in local fish market of Saint Martin' Island, Bangladesh Fly fish ar commerci fish in Japan, Vietnam, and China by gillnetting, and in Indonesia and India by dipnetting.[12] Often in Japanes cuisine, the fish is preserv by dry to be us as fish stock for dashi broth. The roe of Cheilopogon agoo, or Japanes fly fish, is us to make some type of sushi, and is known as tobiko. It is also a stapl in the diet of the Tao peopl of Orchid Island, Taiwan. Fly fish is part of the nation dish of Barbados, cou-cou and fly fish. The tast is close to that of a sardine. In the Solomon Islands, the fish ar caught while thei ar flying, us net held from outrigg canoes. Thei ar attract to the light of torches. Fish is done onli when no moonlight is available. Importanc Tobago Tobago is known as "the land of the fly fish", and the fish is on of the nation symbol of the country. Once abundant, it migrat between the warm, coral-fil Atlantic Ocean surround the island of Barbado and the plankton-rich outflow of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. Just after the complet of the Bridgetown Harbor / Deep Water Harbor in Bridgetown, Barbado had an increas of ship visits, link the island to the world. The overal health of the coral reef surround Barbado suffer due to ship-bas pollution. Additionally, Barbadian overfish push them closer to the Orinoco delta, no longer return to Barbado in larg numbers. Today, the fly fish onli migrat as far north as Tobago, around 120 nmi (220 km; 140 mi) southwest of Barbados. Despit the change, fly fish remain a covet delicacy. Mani aspect of Barbadian cultur center around the fly fish; it is depict on coins, as sculptur in fountains, in artwork, and as part of the offici logo of the Barbado Tourism Authority. Additionally, the Barbadian coat of arm featur a pelican and dolphinfish on either side of the shield, but the dolphin resembl a fly fish. Furthermore, actual artist rendit and hologram of the fly fish ar also present within the Barbadian passport. Maritim disput Further information: Barbado v. Trinidad and Tobago In recent times, fly fish have also been gain in popular in other islands, fuel sever maritim disputes. In 2006, the council of the Unite Nation Convent on the Law of the Sea[19] fix the maritim boundari between Barbado and Trinidad and Tobago over the fly fish dispute, which gradual rais tension between the neighbours.[20] The rule state both countri must preserv stock for the future. Barbadian fisher still follow the fly fish southward. See also Fly and glide anim Neuston Tradeoff for locomot in air and water Refer Fossilworks. "Exocoetidae". Oldest fly fish fossil found in China Nature, News, 31 October 2012. Xu, Guang-Hui; Li-Jun Zhao, Ke-Qin Gao and Fei-Xiang Wu (2012) A new stem-neopterygian fish from the Middl Triassic of China show the earliest over-wat glide strategi of the vertebrates" Proceed of the Royal Societi B: Biolog Sciences, Publish onlin befor print October 31, 2012. doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.2261 Harper, Douglas. "exocet". Online Etymolog Dictionary. Pliny' Natur History, vol. IX, 19) Fish, F. E. (1990). Wing Design And Scale of Fly Fish With Regard To Flight Performance. Journal of Zoology, 221(3), 391-403. Davenport, J. (1994). How And Why Do Fly Fish Fly?. Review in Fish Biologi and Fisheries, 4(2), 184-214. Dasilao, J., & Yamaoka, K. (1998). Develop of the Vertebr Column And Caudal Complex in a Flyingfish, Parexocoetu Mento Mento (Teleostei: Exocoetidae). Ichthyolog Research, 45(3), 303-308. Dasilao, J., & Yamaoka, K. (1998). Develop Of The Vertebr Column And Caudal Complex In A Flyingfish, Parexocoetu Mento Mento (Teleostei: Exocoetidae). Ichthyolog Research, 45(3), 303-308. Dasilao, J. C., & Sasaki, K. (1998). Phylogeni Of The Flyingfish Famili Exocoetida (Teleostei, Beloniformes). Ichthyolog Research, 45(4), 347-353. Fish, F. E. (1990). "Wing design and scale of fly fish with regard to flight performance" (PDF). Journal of Zoology. 221 (3): 391–403. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1990.tb04009.x. Archive from the origin (PDF) on 2013-10-20. Kutschera, U. (2005). "Predator-driven macroevolut in flyingfish infer from behaviour studies: histor controversi and a hypothesis" (PDF). Annal of the Histori and Philosophi of Biology. 10: 59–77. Archive from the origin (PDF) on 2007-08-20. Fish, F. (1991). "On a fin and a prayer" (PDF). Scholars. 3 (1): 4–7. Archive from the origin (PDF) on 2013-11-02. "Fast fly fish glide by ferry". BBC News. Mai 20, 2008. Retriev Mai 20, 2008. Ross Piper (2007), Extraordinari Animals: An Encyclopedia of Curiou and Unusual Animals, Greenwood Press. Fly Fish, Exocoetida Nation Geographic. Retriev 10 August 2014. Joseph Bank (1997). The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Bank 1768–1771 (PDF). Univers of Sydnei Library. Retriev Juli 16, 2009. Moran. Churchill: Taken from the Diari of Lord Moran. p. 819. "Barbados/Trinidad and Tobago". Perman Court of Arbitration. April 11, 2006. Archive from the origin on 2010-06-02. "Claim of Caribbean piraci as nation symbol take flight". The Sydnei Morn Herald. Decemb 18, 2004. External link Wikimedia Common ha media relat to Exocoetidae. Wikisourc ha the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica articl Flying-fish. Fly Fish, Nation Geograph Societi vte Fish About fish Divers Ethnoichthyolog Evolut Diseas and parasit Fisheri Fish Fish as food Fear of fish FishBas Fish kill Hypoxia in fish Ichthyologi Striat frogfish Anatomi and physiolog Fish anatomi Fish physiolog Age determin Anguilliform Bon dermal intramembran ossif Cleithrum Chromatophor Fin dorsal fin Gill branchial arch gill raker gill slit pharyng arch pharyng slit pseudobranch Glossohy Jaw hyomandibula pharyng jaw Leydig' organ Mauthner cell Merist Operculum papillar Papilla Photophor Root effect Shark cartilag Scale ganoin Spiral valv Suckermouth Swim bladder physoclisti physostom Teeth pharyng teeth shark teeth Teleost leptin Digit Librari Sensori system Sensori system in fish Ampulla of Lorenzini Barbel Hydrodynam recept Electrocommun Electrorecept Jam avoid respons Later line Otolith Passiv electroloc Capac for pain Schreckstoff Surfac wave detect Vision Weberian apparatu Reproduct Fish reproduct Bubbl nest Clasper Egg case Fish develop Ichthyoplankton Juvenil fish Lif histori theori Milt Mouthbrood Polyandri in fish Pregnanc Roe Sequenti hermaphrodit Spawn trigger Locomot Fish locomot Fin and flipper locomot Amphibiou fish Walk fish Fly fish Undulatori locomot Tradeoff for locomot in air and water RoboTuna Other behaviour Aquatic predat Aquatic respir Bait ball Bottom feeder Cleaner fish Corallivori Diel vertic migrat Electric fish Filter feeder Forag fish Migrat fish Paedophagi Predatori fish Salmon run Sardin run Scale eater School fish Sleep in fish Venom fish Fish intellig By habitat Cav Coastal Coldwat Coral reef Deep sea Demers Euryhalin Freshwat Groundfish Pelag Tropic Other type Bait Coars Divers Gam Genet modifi Hallucinogen Oili Poison Rough Whitefish Commerci Fish farm Carp Catfish Salmonid Tilapia Wild fisheri Predatori fish billfish mackerel salmon tuna Forag fish anchovi her sardin sprat Demers fish cod flatfish pollock Major group Jawless fish hagfish lamprei Cartilagin fish chimaera shark rai Boni fish spiny-fin fleshy-fin List Aquarium life Blind fish Fish common name Fish famili Glossari of ichthyolog Larg fish Threaten rai shark Prehistor fish Categori more lists... Categori Categori Portal Portal WikiProject WikiProject Taxon identifi Wikidata: Q183686 Wikispecies: Exocoetida ADW: Exocoetida EoL: 8245 Fossilworks: 266181 GBIF: 2968 IRMNG: 114845 ITIS: 165431 NBN: NBNSYS0000160007 NCBI: 76072 NZOR: c91e2e89-b8da-4a7e-867a-639e3f7479ff uBio: 114118 WoRMS: 125452 Author control Edit thi at Wikidata GND: 4154627-1 NDL: 00576573 Categories: ExocoetidaeGlid animalsFish of OceaniaMarin fish of AfricaMarin fish of AsiaFish of HawaiiFish of JapanExt Miocen first appearancesMiocen fishQuaternari fishBarbadian cuisin Navig menu Not log inTalkContributionsCr accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch Search Wikipedia Main page Content Featur content Current event Random articl Donat to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interact Help About Wikipedia Commun portal Recent chang Contact page Tool What link here Relat chang Upload file Special page Perman link Pag inform Wikidata item Cit thi page Print/export Creat a book Download as PDF Printabl version In other project Wikimedia Common Wikispeci Languag Deutsch Español Françai 한국어 Italiano Русский Tagalog Tiếng Việt 中文 53 more Edit link Thi page wa last edit on 16 October 2018, at 19:00 (UTC). Text is avail under the Creativ Common Attribution-ShareAlik License; addit term mai apply. By us thi site, you agre to the Term of Use and Privaci Policy. Wikipedia® is a regist trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privaci policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCooki statementMobil viewWikimedia Foundat Power by MediaWiki

  Subscrib MENU A streamlin torpedo shape help fly fish gener enough speed to break the water’ surface, and large, wing-lik pector fin help get them airborne. PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYA MINAKUCHI, MINDEN PICTURES/NAT GEO IMAGE COLLECTION ANIMALSREFERENCE Fly Fish COMMON NAME: Fly Fish SCIENTIFIC NAME: Exocoetida TYPE: Fish DIET: Omnivor GROUP NAME: School SIZE: Up to 18 in SIZE RELATIVE TO A TEACUP: Get photos, videos, and exclus journal about wildlif and pets, plu special offers. Enter your email By sign up for thi email, you ar agre to news, offers, and inform from Nation Geograph Partner and our partners. Click here to visit our Privaci Policy. Easi unsubscrib link ar provid in everi email. ABOUT FLYING FISH Fly fish can be seen jump out of warm ocean water worldwide. Their streamlin torpedo shape help them gather enough underwat speed to break the surface, and their large, wing-lik pector fin get them airborne. Fly fish ar thought to have evolv thi remark glide abil to escap predators, of which thei have many. Their pursuer includ mackerel, tuna, swordfish, marlin, and other larger fish. For their sustenance, fly fish feed on a varieti of foods, includ plankton. Characterist There ar at least 40 known speci of fly fish. Beyond their us pector fins, all have unevenli fork tails, with the lower lobe longer than the upper lobe. Mani speci have enlarg pelvic fin as well and ar known as four-wing fly fish. Glide Abiliti The process of take flight, or gliding, begin by gain great veloc underwater, about 37 mile per hour. Angling upward, the four-wing fly fish break the surfac and begin to taxi by rapidli beat it tail while it is still beneath the surface. It then take to the air, sometim reach height over 4 feet and glide long distances, up to 655 feet. Once it near the surfac again, it can flap it tail and taxi without fulli return to the water. Capabl of continu it flight in such a manner, fly fish have been record stretch out their flight with consecut glide span distanc up to 1,312 feet. Fish Fly fish ar attract to light, like a number of sea creatures, and fishermen take advantag of thi with substanti results. Canoes, fill with enough water to sustain fish, but not enough to allow them to propel themselv out, ar affix with a lure light at night to captur fly fish by the dozens. There is current no protect statu on these animals. READ MORE DID YOU KNOW? Fly fish can soar high enough that sailor often find them on the deck of their ships. These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. 1/7 To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL NEWTON, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY EMON JAMAN, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY L. ARTIOLA, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY MATIAS ALEXANDRO, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY GINETTE VACHON, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY L. ARTIOLA, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBBIE LABANOWSKI, YOUR SHOT These photo were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in stori assignments, and get help feedback. SHARE TWEET EMAIL COPY MOST POPULAR ANIMALS African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagl Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Prai Manti Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmes Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraff Cheetah Red Fox Hors Grai Wolf African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagl Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Prai Manti Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmes Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraff Cheetah Red Fox Hors Grai Wolf African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagl Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Prai Manti Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmes Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraff Cheetah Red Fox Hors Grai Wolf SEE ALL ANIMAL FACTS & PICTURES Search animal... SEE ALL ANIMALS PHOTOS BY JOEL SARTORE, NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC PHOTO ARK PHOTO ARK The Nation Geograph Photo Ark is a multiyear project creat intim portrait of everi speci in captiv to inspir peopl to help ensur their surviv in the wild. Photo Ark founder Joel Sartor ha photograph 8,000 speci around the world, includ mani that face grow threat to their survival. Learn more about how to help protect these creatures. LEARN MORE LATEST IN ANIMALS ANIMALS PICTURE STORIES Paint wolves, struggl to survive, find a new food: baboon READ ANIMALS Human-caus extinct have set mammal back… READ ANIMALS WILDLIFE WATCH How the world’ largest snake hunt hurt Southeast Asia's… WATCH ANIMALS See thi year' best wildlif photo SEE PHOTOS MAGAZINE Dolphin have uniqu whistl for their friends, and more… READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN SCIENCE & INNOVATION SCIENCE & INNOVATION 'World’ oldest fossils’ mai just be pretti rock READ MAGAZINE Scienc seek to unlock marijuana' secret READ Wreckag of WWII-era warship U.S.S. Indianapoli found… READ SCIENCE & INNOVATION Did Vesuviu vapor it victims? Get the facts. READ How Microsoft Billionair Found Largest Sunken… READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENT PLANET OR PLASTIC? Microplast found in 90 percent of tabl salt READ MAGAZINE Scienc seek to unlock marijuana' secret READ ENVIRONMENT Thi chemic turn pollut green lake clear. Is it safe? READ ENVIRONMENT What a Gold Rush-era orchard could mean for the futur of food READ ENVIRONMENT Bill Gat launch effort to help the world adapt to climat chang READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN TRAVEL TRAVEL Visit Europe' most beauti cemeteri READ PARTNER CONTENT Climb to the top of a rainforest tree canopi in Costa Rica READ PARTNER CONTENT Journei Across Canada by Train READ TRAVEL Go insid Frankenstein' castl READ PARTNER CONTENT Sight and bites: what to eat while tour San Diego, California READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN CULTURE & EXPLORATION MAGAZINE Scienc seek to unlock marijuana' secret READ Sunken World War II aircraft carrier found by deep-sea expedit READ HISTORY MAGAZINE Jaguar were the divin felin of the ancient America READ ENVIRONMENT A run list of how Presid Trump is changing… READ CULTURE & EXPLORATION Photo show how Saudi Arabia ha chang over time READ LOAD MORE THE BEST OF NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC DELIVERED TO YOUR INBOX. Sign up for more inspir photos, stories, and special offer from Nation Geographic. Enter your email By sign up for thi email, you ar agre to news, offers, and inform from Nation Geograph Partner and our partners. Click here to visit our Privaci Policy. Easi unsubscrib link ar provid in everi email. COMPANY Nation Geograph Societi Book a Trip Bui Photo Attend a Liv Event Visit the Museum Explore Our Map Genograph Shop the Store For Kid Your Shot ABOUT NAT GEO Contact Us About Us Advertis With Us Press Privaci Polici Cooki Polici GDPR FAQ Ad Choic Term of Servic JOIN US Subscrib Sign In Job Unite State FOLLOW US Copyright © 1996-2015 Nation Geograph Society|Copyright © 2015-2018 Nation Geograph Partners, LLC. All right reserv 

softschools.com Pre-K Kindergarten 1st Grade 2nd Grade 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5th Grade Middl School High School Phonic Fun Gam Math Math Gam Math Worksheet Algebra Languag Art Scienc Social Studi Literatur Languag Theme Quizz Timelin Login Hom > Fact > Animal Fact > Fly fish Fact Fly fish Fact Fly fish Fact Fly fish is on of the most interest type of fish due to it abil to glide through the air. There ar 40 differ speci of fly fish that can be found in all ocean of the world. Thei prefer tropic and subtrop water of Atlantic, Pacif and Indian Ocean. Fly fish ar especi abund in the Caribbean Sea. Barbado wa known as the "The land of fly fish" in the past. Fly fish ar often hunt by fisherman. Luckili their number in the wild is still stabl and thei ar not list as endang species. Interest Fly fish Facts: Siz of fly fish depend on the species. Thei ar usual 7 to 12 inch long. Upper side of the bodi of fly fish is bluish-grey. Their belli is grayish-silver. Fly fish ha fork tail. Lower piec of the tail is longer than upper piece. Pector fin of fly fish can be spread into wing-lik shape. Certain speci have pelvic fin shape like wing also, and thei look like thei have two pair of wings. Fly fish ar shape like torpedo. Their fin ar close when thei swim to ensur faster movement through the water. Befor it emerg abov the water, fly fish acceler toward the surfac of the water with the speed of 37 mile per hour. When requir speed is accomplished, fly fish jump out of the water and spread it wings. Fly fish can reach the height of 4 feet in the air, and glide distanc of 655 feet befor return back to the water. Fly fish can travel distanc of 1.312 feet without rest. Thi is import becaus it ensur quick escap from predators. Main predat of fly fish ar marlin, tuna, swordfish, mackerel and humans. Fly fish swim in larg school (groups). Thi featur is especi appreci by fishermen that can catch larg number of fish when thei bump into a singl school. Fly fish ar veri sensit and easili attract by the light (fishermen us light to guid fly fish toward their ships). Despit that fact, fly fish hunt mainli dure the night. Fly fish eat plankton, bacteria and other tini marin creatures. Mat season of fly fish take place when the ocean current ar the weakest. Depend on the ocean, it can be dure the spring of autumn. Fly fish live in larg group and their number can exce million individu dure the mate season. Femal deposit larg number of egg near the surfac of the water. Egg ar usual attach to the float debris. Young fly fish have whisker near the mouths, and thei look like the underwat plants. Thi appear ensur surviv dure the first few dai of life, when the youngster ar the most vulnerable. Averag lifespan of fly fish is around 5 year in the wild. Relat Links: Fact Animal Fact Animal Fact <a href="http://www.softschools.com/facts/animals/flying_fish_facts/318/">Fli fish Facts</a> Mor Topic Handwrit Spanish Fact Exampl Formula Differ Between Invention Literatur Flashcard 2018 Calendar Online Calcul Multipl Educat Video Quizz Flashcard Color Pag Link Link us Contact Us Privaci polici Term of Use Search © 2005-2018 Softschools.com  

The Nation Wildlif Feder Contact Us Blog Shop Log In Search for... The Nation Wildlif Feder OUR WORK GET INVOLVED ABOUT US KIDS & FAMILY EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES MAGAZINES LATEST NEWS Donat Donat Fly Fish HOME EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES WILDLIFE GUIDE FISH FLYING FISH Fly Fish Fly Fish Family: Exocoetida STATUS: NOT LISTED CLASSIFICATION: FISH DESCRIPTION Fly fish ar ray-fin fish with highli modifi pector fins. Despit their name, fly fish aren’t capabl of power flight. Instead thei propel themselv out of the water at speed of more than 35 mile (56 kilometers) an hour. Once in the air, their rigid “wings” allow them to glide for up to 650 feet (200 meters). The winglik pector fin ar primarili for gliding—th fish hold the fin flat at their side when swimming. Their streamlin bodi reduc drag when the fish ar “flying.” Another interest characterist of the fly fish is it unevenli fork tail, which ha a top lobe that’ shorter than the bottom lobe. Fly fish can be up to 18 inch (45 centimeters) long, but averag 7 to 12 inch (17 to 30 centimeters). RANGE There ar roughli 40 speci of fly fish. Fly fish ar tropic and temper marin speci that can be seen off both the Atlantic and Pacif coast of the Unite States. Thei ar also found in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. Open ocean provid a habitat for most fly fish, but some live instead on the outskirt of coral reefs. It’ thought that fly fish evolv a fly mechan to escap from their mani ocean predators. Once in the air, though, thei sometim becom food for birds. Young fly fish mai have filament protrud from their lower jaw that camouflag them as plant blossoms. DIET Fly fish eat a varieti of foods, but plankton make up a larg part of their diet. Thei sometim eat small crustacean as well. LIFE HISTORY Spawn take place in the open ocean, near the water’ surface. A femal deposit eggs, which ar attach by sticki filament to seawe and float debris. Newli hatch fly fish have whisker near their mouths, which disguis them as plants, thu protect them from predators. A fly fish live for an averag of five years. CONSERVATION Fly fish popul ar stable. These fish ar commerci fish in some places. Fly fish ar attract to light and ar rel easi to catch becaus of their tendenc to leap into small, well-lit boats. FUN FACT Som fly fish also have winglik pelvic fin that help them to glide. These speci ar call four-wing fly fish. SOURCES Discoveri Nation Geograph Smithsonian Tropic Research Institut Get Involv DONATE TODAY SIGN A PETITION DONATE MONTHLY NEARBY EVENTS Shop the Nation Wildlif Federation’ Relat Item Ranger Rick 1 year Subscript Ranger Rick 1 year Subscript $19.95 each Celebr Sponsorship Celebr Sponsorship $10.00-$150.00 each Wildlif Adoption Gift Card Wildlif Adoption Gift Card $50.00 Gift Card Get the Latest Update SIGN UP NOW What' Trend a boi look up through binocular JOIN THE NATURE PACK! Place your order todai for the theme box that deliv everyth you need to creat famili memori while discov natur and wildlife. Read Mor Richard Branson in front of Virgin Altantic airplan SOARING SUSTAINABILITY: HISTORIC FLIGHT ON LOW-CARBON JET FUEL Get a glimps insid the first commerci flight—pow by Virgin Atlantic—to us advanc waste-bas biofuels. Read Mor beach dune REBUILDING STRONGER The Nation Wildlif Feder outlin 12 recommend to protect America from hurrican and worsen extrem storms. Read Mor red wolf CALL TO ACTION FOR RED WOLVES: “WE CANNOT TURN OUR BACK ON A NATIVE SPECIES” There ar fewer than 40 red wolv left in the wild—fre roam the forest and marsh of eastern North Carolina. Read Mor Happen Near You You don't have to travel far to join us for an event. Attend an upcom event with on of our region center or affiliates. LEARN MORERegion Center and Affiliat ABOUT US CONTACT US MAGAZINES BLOG ACTION FUND CAREERS Nation Wildlif Feder The Nation Wildlif Feder Unite all American to ensur wildlif thrive in a rapidli chang world PO Box 1583, Merrifield, VA 22116-1583 800.822.9919 Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Ranger Rick Meet Ranger Rick Our belov wildlif ambassador ha been creat lifelong connect with natur for generations. Learn Mor Nation Wildlif Feder is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organ Term & DisclosuresSit MapPrivaci PolicyLanguag Power by Googl TranslateTransl 

HOME FRESHWATER FISH SALTWATER FISH JOURNAL Fish Laboratori Fly Fish - Fact fly fish.jpg The World of Fly Fish One of the most unusu speci of fish in the ocean is the Exocoetidae, of fly fish. Thi anim is unlik ani other fish in that it is abl to liter fly through the air. In certain part of the world, the fly fish is a special part of the cultur through heritage, provid food, and through culture. The fly fish gener grow up to 18 inch in matur and never weigh more than two pounds. The modern fly fish is thought to have evolv some 66 million year ago accord to fossils. There ar 40 known speci of fly fish in the world. The abil to fly is thought to have evolv from the need to escap predat in the sea. Swordfish, Tuna, and Marlin ar known to feed on fly fish. The fly fish ha unusu larg pector fin and a fork tail. To launch itself into the air, the fish angl itself at a trajectori to reach the surface, beat it tail up to 70 time per second. As it break the surfac of the water, it spread it larg pector fin and glides. As it lose momentum, it put it fin down and re-enter the water. Sometim it can just touch the surfac of the water and regain altitud for anoth glide. The typic length of the flight is about 150 feet and last 15-20 seconds. In 2008, a Japanes film crew just happen to catch a fly fish catch flight for 45 second which is the longest record flight. Fly fish have been report found on deck of ship which indic that thei ar capabl of reach altitud of up to 20 feet. Most flight ar typic four to five feet in height. Fly fish ar found in all ocean but ar especi common in warmer, tropic climates. Thei feed on smaller fish and plankton. While their number ar not known, thei ar thought to be rel common and without risk of extinction. Thei ar attract to light, which is why thei ar found at the surfac of the water. Thi also is a downfal as thei ar easili caught by fish nets. Fly fish ar heavili fish in Asia and ar a delicaci in Taiwan and Japanes cuisine. Becaus of the unusu fly characteristics, the fly fish is rever in sever cultur all over the world. The island of Barbado is known as “the land of the fly fish.” At on time, fly fish were veri common here becaus of an unusu amount of plankton in the water here. Until recently, when boat from other nearbi island began trade with Barbados, thei were a stapl of society. But as more boat came to the island, overfish occur and the fly fish were push farther out into the ocean. Today, there ar law in place that protect the fly fish from be overfish as island nation near Barbado respect and honor an agreement to allow enough fish to surviv to ensur futur gener of the animal. Imageri of the fly fish ar found on Barbado currency, in the nation seal, and on passports. And it is consid a stapl of the diet in Barbados. Similar to Barbados, Taiwan and other Asian cultur place high valu on the fly fish. Not onli is the fish consid a delicaci and heavili fish in Asian waters, but it is also rever in cultur with festiv and celebrations. Taiwan call their island the home of the fly fish. Each year in Spring, the fish migrat into the warmer water of Taiwan. In March, a giant festiv is held to celebr the arriv of the fish. However, the Taiwanes cultur acknowledg to speci of fly fish. The first to arriv is the speci Cheilopogon Unicolor. The Taiwan fishermen have a uniqu wai to catch these fish. Thei will go out into the water at night in small boat similar to cano and wave fire torch abov the water. As we know, the fish ar attract to light and will take flight at the sight of the fire. And, unwittingly, thei take flight into the boat where thei ar return to the island to be share in mani delicaci of the region. However, the main speci of fly fish doesn’t appear until April when the Cheilopogon Cyanopteru make it appear in Taiwanes waters. The peopl believ that thi speci is the “soul and chief” of the fly fish and, therefore, most revered. So import is the fly fish to the Taiwan cultur that even the calendar season revolv around the migrat of the fly fish. The spring season is call ‘rajun,' or the fly fish season. Summer and autumn ar known as 'teteka,’ or when the fly fish season ends. Winter is call ‘aminon,’ or when there ar no fly fish. There is a cluster of small island of the main island of Taiwan where the fly fish take an especi import role. Each season, thei have a fly fish festiv where the young men of the island perform ceremoni ritual in homag to the fish. The fly fish ar consid a gift from Heaven and ar cook in a special way. No salt is us while cook the fish. Instead, thei soak the fish in seawat and then hang it up to dry in the sun. Then thei store the fish in special homemad contain to last dure the season of no fly fish. Another tradit uniqu to thi area of Taiwan is that men ar onli to eat on speci of fly fish while the women eat another. The elderli have a third speci just for them. It is state in their cultur that if an elderli person eat a speci reserv for a younger man or woman, thei will fall ill. While the fly fish mai be seen onli as a curios to many, it is seen as a wai of life to others. Thi uniqu fish with the abil to soar abov it predat ha a special place in mani cultur seemingli world apart. As cruis becom more popular as a mean of vacat and travel, more peopl ar take notic of these littl anim jump out of the water. Tak heed the next time you see one, and pai a littl respect to on of nature’ most unusu gifts. Newer / Older Comment (4) Newest First Subscrib via e-mail Preview Post Comment… Patrick 2 year ago · 0 Lik Coolest fish hand down julian 2 year ago · 1 Lik ya mutha Alexi 2 year ago · 0 Lik lol Alexi 2 year ago · 0 Lik I think you should add who discov it and when it wa discovered. Search Fish Laboratori Newslett Sign up with your email address to receiv new and updates. Email Address SIGN UP We respect your privacy. Contact Us Copyright © 2017 Fish Laboratori Design by Fishora 