Fly fishing is an angling method in which an artificial "fly" is used to catch fish. The fly is cast using a fly rod, reel, and specialized weighted line. Casting a nearly weightless fly or "lure" requires casting techniques significantly different from other forms of casting. Fly fishermen use hand tied flies that resemble natural invertebrates, baitfish, other food organisms, or "lures" to provoke the fish to strike (bite at the fly). Fly fishing can be done in fresh or salt water. North Americans usually distinguish freshwater fishing between cold-water species (trout, salmon, steelhead) and warm-water species, notably bass. In Britain, where natural water temperatures vary less, the distinction is between game fishing for trout and salmon versus coarse fishing for other species. Techniques for fly fishing differ with habitat (lakes and ponds, small streams, large rivers, bays and estuaries, and open ocean.) Author Izaak Walton called fly fishing "The Contemplative Man's Recreation". Contents 1 Main overview 1.1 Fish species 2 History 2.1 Origins 2.2 Development 2.3 Technological improvements 2.4 Expansion 3 Methods 3.1 Casting 3.2 Spey casting 3.3 Fly fishing for trout 4 Techniques 4.1 Fishing in cold water 4.2 Dry fly trout fishing 4.3 Nymphing for trout 4.4 Still water trout fishing 4.5 Playing trout 4.6 Releasing trout 4.7 Saltwater flyfishing 5 Tackle 6 Artificial flies 7 Knots 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Main overview This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Fly rod and reel with a brown trout from a chalk stream in England In fly fishing, fish are caught by using artificial flies that are cast with a fly rod and a fly line. The fly line (today, almost always coated with plastic) is heavy enough to send the fly to the target. The main difference between fly fishing and spin or bait fishing is that in fly fishing the weight of the line carries the hook through the air, whereas in spin and bait fishing the weight of the lure or sinker at the end of the monofilament or braided line gives casting distance. Artificial flies are of several types; some imitating an insect (either flying or swimming), others a bait fish or crustacean, others attractors are known to attract fish although they look like nothing in nature. Flies can be made either to float or sink, and range in size from a few millimeters to 30 cm long; most are between 1 and 5 cm. Artificial flies are made by fastening hair, fur, feathers, or other materials, both natural and synthetic, onto a hook. The first flies were tied with natural materials, but synthetic materials are now popular and prevalent. Flies are tied in sizes, colors and patterns to match local terrestrial and aquatic insects, baitfish, or other prey attractive to the target fish species. Fish species Fly fishing is most renowned as a method for catching trout, grayling and salmon, but it is also used for a wide variety of species including pike, bass, panfish, and carp, as well as marine species, such as redfish, snook, tarpon, bonefish and striped bass. Many fly anglers catch unintended species such as chub, bream and rudd while fishing for 'main target' species such as trout. A growing population of anglers[who?] attempt to catch as many different species as possible with the fly. With the advancement of technology and development of stronger rods and reels, larger predatory saltwater species such as wahoo, tuna, marlin and sharks have become target species on fly. Realistically any fish can be targeted and captured on fly as long as the main food source is effectively replicated by the fly itself and suitable gear is used. History Many credit the first recorded use of an artificial fly to the Roman Claudius Aelianus near the end of the 2nd century. He described the practice of Macedonian anglers on the Astraeus River: ...they have planned a snare for the fish, and get the better of them by their fisherman's craft. . . . They fasten red wool. . . round a hook, and fit on to the wool two feathers which grow under a cock's wattles, and which in color are like wax. Their rod is six feet long, and their line is the same length. Then they throw their snare, and the fish, attracted and maddened by the color, comes straight at it, thinking from the pretty sight to gain a dainty mouthful; when, however, it opens its jaws, it is caught by the hook, and enjoys a bitter repast, a captive. In his book Fishing from the Earliest Times, however, William Radcliff (1921) gave the credit to Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis), born some two hundred years before Aelianus, who wrote: ...Who has not seen the scarus rise, decoyed and killed by fraudful flies... The last word, somewhat indistinct in the original, is either "mosco" (moss) or "musca" (fly) but catching fish with fraudulent moss seems unlikely.[1][citation needed] The traditional Japanese method of fly-fishing is known as "Tenkara" (Japanese: テンカラ, literally: "from heaven").[2] Tenkara originated in the mountains of Japan as a way for professional fishermen and inn-keepers to harvest the local fish, Ayu, trout and char for selling and providing a meal to their guests. Primarily a small-stream fishing method that was preferred for being highly efficient, where the long rod allowed the fisherman to place the fly where the fish would be. Another style of fishing in Japan is Ayu fishing. As written by historian Andrew Herd, in the book "The Fly", "Fly fishing became popular with Japanese peasants from the twelfth century onward...fishing was promoted to a pastime worthy of Bushi (warriors), as part of an official policy to train the Bushi's mind during peacetime."[3] This refers primarily to Ayu fishing, which commonly uses a fly as lure, uses longer rods, but there is no casting technique required, it's more similar to dapping. Ayu was practiced in the lowlands (foothills), where the Bushi resided, tenkara practiced in the mountains. Fishing flies are thought to have originated in Japan for Ayu fishing over 430 years ago.[4] These flies were made with needles that were bent into shape and used as fishing hooks, then dressed as a fly. The rods along with fishing flies, are considered to be a traditional local craft of the Kaga region.[5] Although anglers in Scotland and Ireland had been fishing the lochs and loughs for trout with an artificial fly for several generations (as far back as 1840 John Colquhoun listed the menus of fly dressings in his book The Moor and Loch detailing the wings, body and hackle of artificial flies in use at the time), the history of stillwater trout fishing in English reservoirs goes back little more than a century. The simple reason for that was because (apart from the Lake District which was somewhat isolated before the construction of the railways) England possessed few large stillwaters that contained trout. That all changed when the water supply reservoirs began to be built to meet the increasing demand for water from the big cities. The earliest of these reservoirs to be stocked with trout were Thrybergh Reservoir close to Doncaster completed around 1880, Lake Vyrnwy, Powys in 1891, Ravensthorpe Reservoir in Northamptonshire in 1895 and Blagdon Lake in Somerset which was first opened as a trout fishery in 1904[6]. Origins Izaak Walton's The Compleat Angler, published in 1653 helped popularize fly fishing as a sport. Woodcut by Louis Rhead, 1900 Other than a few fragmented references little was written on fly fishing until The Treatyse on Fysshynge with an Angle was published (1496) within The Boke of Saint Albans attributed to Dame Juliana Berners. The book contains instructions on rod, line and hook making and dressings for different flies to use at different times of the year. By the 15th century, rods of approximately fourteen feet length with a twisted line attached at its tips were probably used in England. The earliest English poetical treatise on Angling by John Dennys, said to have been a fishing companion of Shakespeare, was published in 1613, The Secrets of Angling. Footnotes of the work, written by Dennys' editor, William Lawson, make the first mention of the phrase to 'cast a fly': "The trout gives the most gentlemanly and readiest sport of all, if you fish with an artificial fly, a line twice your rod's length of three hairs' thickness... and if you have learnt the cast of the fly."[7] The art of fly fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. The renowned officer in the Parliamentary army, Robert Venables, published in 1662 The Experienced Angler, or Angling improved, being a general discourse of angling, imparting many of the aptest ways and choicest experiments for the taking of most sorts of fish in pond or river. Another Civil War veteran to enthusiastically take up fishing was Richard Franck. He was the first to describe salmon fishing in Scotland, and both in that and trout-fishing with artificial fly he was a practical angler. He was the first angler to name the burbot, and commended the salmon of the River Thames.[8] The Compleat Angler was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye. It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse; 6 verses were quoted from John Dennys's earlier work. A second part to the book was added by Walton's friend Charles Cotton.[8] Walton did not profess to be an expert with a fishing fly; the fly fishing in his first edition was contributed by Thomas Barker, a retired cook and humorist, who produced a treatise of his own in 1659; but in the use of the live worm, the grasshopper and the frog "Piscator" himself could speak as a master. The famous passage about the frog, often misquoted as being about the worm—"use him as though you loved him, that is, harm him as little as you may possibly, that he may live the longer"—appears in the original edition. Cotton's additions completed the instruction in fly fishing and advised on the making of artificial flies where he listed sixty five varieties. Charles Kirby designed an improved fishing hook in 1655 that remains relatively unchanged to this day. He went on to invent the Kirby bend, a distinctive hook with an offset point, still commonly used today.[9] Development Trading card of the Ustonson company, an early firm specializing in fishing equipment, and holder of a Royal Warrant from the 1760s. The 18th century was mainly an era of consolidation of the techniques developed in the previous century. Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line. The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialized for different roles. Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it a much greater strength and flexibility. The industry also became commercialized - rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained as a market leader for the next century. He received a Royal Warrant and became the official supplier of fishing tackle to three successive monarchs starting with King George IV over this period.[10] Some have credited Onesimus with the invention of the multiplying winch, although he was certainly the first to advertise its sale. Early multiplying reels were wide and had a small diameter, and their gears, made of brass, often wore down after extensive use. His earliest advertisement in the form of a trading card date from 1768 and was entitled To all lovers of angling. A full list of the tackles he sold included artificial flies, and 'the best sort of multiplying brass winches both stop and plain'. The commercialization of the industry came at a time of expanded interest in fishing as a recreational hobby for members of the aristocracy.[11] The impact of the Industrial Revolution was first felt in the manufacture of fly lines. Instead of anglers twisting their own lines - a laborious and time-consuming process - the new textile spinning machines allowed for a variety of tapered lines to be easily manufactured and marketed. British fly-fishing continued to develop in the 19th Century, with the emergence of fly fishing clubs, along with the appearance of several books on the subject of fly tying and fly fishing techniques. The Fly-fisher's Entomology by Alfred Ronalds had a great influence on the development of fly fishing when it was first published in 1836. Alfred Ronalds took up the sport of fly fishing, learning the craft on the rivers Trent, Blythe and Dove. On the River Blythe, near what is today Creswell Green, Ronalds constructed a bankside fishing hut designed primarily as an observatory of trout behaviour in the river. From this hut, and elsewhere on his home rivers, Ronalds conducted experiments and formulated the ideas that eventually were published in The Fly-fisher's Entomology in 1836.[12] He combined his knowledge of fly fishing with his skill as an engraver and printer, to lavish his work with 20 color plates. It was the first comprehensive work related to the entomology associated with fly fishing and most fly-fishing historians credit Ronalds with setting a literature standard in 1836 that is still followed today.[13] Describing methods, techniques and, most importantly, artificial flies, in a meaningful way for the angler and illustrating them in colour is a method of presentation that can be seen in most fly-fishing literature today. The book was mostly about the aquatic insects—mayflies, caddisflies and stoneflies—that trout and grayling feed on and their counterpart artificial imitations. About half the book is devoted to observations of trout, their behaviour, and the methods and techniques used to catch them. Most of this information, although enhanced by Ronalds' experiences and observations, was merely an enhancement of Charles Bowlker's Art of Angling (first published in 1774 but still in print in 1836).[14] In Chapter IV - Of a Selection of Insects, and Their Imitations, Used in Fly Fishing - for the first time is discussed specific artificial fly imitations by name, associated with the corresponding natural insect. Organized by their month of appearance, Ronalds was the first author to begin the standardization of angler names for artificial flies. Prior to The Fly-fisher's Entomology, anglers had been given suggestions for artificial flies to be used on a particular river or at a particular time of the year, but those suggestions were never matched to specific natural insects the angler might encounter on the water.[15] According to Ernest Schwiebert: "Ronalds is one of the major milestones in the entire literature of fly-fishing, and with his Entomology the scientific method has reached angling in full flower. Ronalds was completely original in its content and research, setting the yardstick for all subsequent discussion and illustration of aquatic fly hatches.[16] Technological improvements 'Nottingham' and 'Scarborough' reel designs Modern reel design had begun in England during the latter part of the 18th century, and the predominant model in use was known as the 'Nottingham reel'. The reel was a wide drum which spooled out freely, and was ideal for allowing the bait to drift a long way out with the current. Geared multiplying reels never successfully caught on in Britain, but had more success in the United States, where similar models were modified by George Snyder of Kentucky into his bait-casting reel, the first American-made design, in 1810.[17] The material used for the rod itself changed from the heavy woods native to England, to lighter and more elastic varieties imported from abroad, especially from South America and the West Indies. Bamboo rods became the generally favoured option from the mid-19th century, and several strips of the material were cut from the cane, milled into shape, and then glued together to form light, strong, hexagonal rods with a solid core that were superior to anything that preceded them. George Cotton and his predecessors fished their flies with long rods and light lines, allowing the wind to do most of the work of getting the fly to the fish.[18] Fishing became a popular recreational activity in the 19th century. Print from Currier and Ives. Tackle design began to improve from the 1880s. The introduction of new woods to the manufacture of fly rods made it possible to cast flies into the wind on silk lines, instead of horse hair. These lines allowed for a much greater casting distance. However, these early fly lines proved troublesome as they had to be coated with various dressings to make them float and needed to be taken off the reel and dried every four hours or so to prevent them from becoming waterlogged. Another negative consequence was that it became easy for the much longer line to get into a tangle – this was called a 'tangle' in Britain, and a 'backlash' in the US. This problem spurred the invention of the regulator to evenly spool the line out and prevent tangling.[18] An American, Charles F. Orvis, designed and distributed a novel reel and fly design in 1874, described by reel historian Jim Brown as the "benchmark of American reel design", and the first fully modern fly reel.[19][20] The founding of The Orvis Company helped institutionalize fly fishing by supplying angling equipment via the circulation of his tackle catalogs, distributed to a small but devoted customer list.[citation needed] Albert Illingworth, 1st Baron Illingworth, a textiles magnate, patented the modern form of fixed-spool spinning reel in 1905. When casting Illingworth's reel design, the line was drawn off the leading edge of the spool, but was restrained and rewound by a line pickup, a device which orbits around the stationary spool. Because the line did not have to pull against a rotating spool, much lighter lures could be cast than with conventional reels.[18] Expansion Frontispiece from The Art of Angling by Richard Brookes, 1790 By the mid to late 19th century, expanding leisure opportunities for the middle and lower classes began to have its effect on fly fishing, which steadily grew in mass appeal. The expansion of the railway network in Britain allowed the less affluent for the first time to take weekend trips to the seaside or to rivers for fishing. Richer hobbyists ventured further abroad.[21] The large rivers of Norway replete with large stocks of salmon began to attract fishermen from England in large numbers in the middle of the century - Jones's guide to Norway, and salmon-fisher's pocket companion, published in 1848, was written by Frederic Tolfrey and was a popular guide to the country.[21] In southern England, dry-fly fishing acquired an elitist reputation as the only reliable method of fishing the slower, clearer rivers of the south such as the River Test and the other chalk streams concentrated in Hampshire, Surrey, Dorset and Berkshire (see Southern England Chalk Formation for the geological specifics). The weeds found in these rivers tend to grow very close to the surface, and it was necessary to develop new techniques that would keep the fly and the line on the surface of the stream. These methods became the foundation of all later dry-fly developments. F. M. Halford was a major exponent and is generally accepted as "The Father of Modern Dry Fly Fishing."[22][23] However, there was nothing to prevent the successful employment of wet flies on these chalk streams, as G. E. M. Skues proved with his nymph and wet fly techniques. To the horror of dry-fly purists, Skues later wrote two books, Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream, and The Way of a Trout with a Fly, which greatly influenced the development of wet fly fishing. In northern England and Scotland, many anglers also favored wet-fly fishing, where the technique was more popular and widely practiced than in southern England. One of Scotland’s leading proponents of the wet fly in the early-to-mid 19th century was W.C. Stewart, who published "The Practical Angler" in 1857. From The Speckled Brook Trout by Louis Rhead (1902) In the United States, attitudes toward methods of fly fishing were not nearly as rigidly defined, and both dry- and wet-fly fishing were soon adapted to the conditions of the country. Fly anglers there are thought to be the first anglers to have used artificial lures for bass fishing. After pressing into service the fly patterns and tackle designed for trout and salmon to catch largemouth and smallmouth bass, they began to adapt these patterns into specific bass flies. Fly anglers seeking bass developed the spinner/fly lure and bass popper fly, which are still used today.[24] In the late 19th century, American anglers, such as Theodore Gordon in the Catskill Mountains of New York, began using fly tackle to fish the region’s brook trout-rich streams such as the Beaverkill and Willowemoc Creek. Many of these early American fly anglers also developed new fly patterns and wrote extensively about their sport, increasing the popularity of fly fishing in the region and in the United States as a whole.[24] Albert Bigelow Paine, a New England author, wrote about fly fishing in The Tent Dwellers, a book about a three-week trip he and a friend took to central Nova Scotia in 1908. Participation in fly fishing peaked in the early 1920s in the eastern states of Maine and Vermont and in the Midwest in the spring creeks of Wisconsin. Along with deep sea fishing, Ernest Hemingway did much to popularize fly fishing through his works of fiction, including The Sun Also Rises. Fly fishing in Australia took off when brown trout were first introduced by the efforts of Edward Wilson's Acclimatisation Society of Victoria with the aim to "provide for manly sport which will lead Australian youth to seek recreation on the river's bank and mountainside rather than in the Cafe and Casino.[25] " The first successful transfer of Brown Trout ova (from the Itchen and Wye) was accomplished by James Arndell Youl, with a consignment aboard The Norfolk in 1864. Rainbow Trout were not introduced until 1894. It was the development of inexpensive fiberglass rods, synthetic fly lines, and monofilament leaders, however, in the early 1950s, that revived the popularity of fly fishing. In recent years, interest in fly fishing has surged as baby boomers have discovered the sport. Movies such as Robert Redford's film A River Runs Through It, starring Craig Sheffer and Brad Pitt, cable fishing shows, and the emergence of a competitive fly casting circuit have added to the sport's visibility. Methods Casting Maramec spring fishing Fly casting, Maramec Spring Branch, Missouri Unlike other casting methods, fly fishing can be thought of as a method of casting line rather than lure. Non-flyfishing methods rely on a lure's weight to pull line from the reel during the forward motion of a cast. By design, a fly is too light to be cast, and thus simply follows the unfurling of a properly cast fly line, which is heavier and tapered and therefore more castable than lines used in other types of fishing. The physics of flycasting can be described by the transfer of impulse, the product of mass and speed through the rod from base to top and from the transfer of impulse through the fly line all the way to the tip of the leader. Because both the rod and the fly line are tapered the smaller amount of mass will reach high speeds as the waves in rod and line unfurl.[26] The waves that travel through the fly line are called loops. Determining factors in reaching the highest speeds are the basal frequency of a rod and the transfer of the speed from the tip of the rod to the fly line. At the moment the rod tip reaches its highest velocity the direction of the cast is determined. Fly angler circa 1970s The type of cast used when fishing varies according to the conditions. The most common cast is the forward cast, where the angler whisks the fly into the air, back over the shoulder until the line is nearly straight, then forward, using primarily the forearm. The objective of this motion is to "load" (bend) the rod tip with stored energy, then transmit that energy to the line, resulting in the fly line (and the attached fly) being cast for an appreciable distance. However, just bending the rod and releasing it to jerk the fly line forward (like a bowstring or a catapult) will not propel the fly line and fly very far. More important is the movement of the rod through an arc acting as a lever, magnifying the hand movement of the caster (of about a foot) to an arc at the rod tip of several feet. Here the rod acts as a lever. In fact, one of the Class 3 types of lever, where The force is applied between the fulcrum and the load (like tweezers). The fulcrum in the fly cast is below the caster's hand gripping the rod; the load is at the rod tip; between the hand exerts the force. The caster's "stroke" backwards and forwards, for the backcast and the forward cast, operates the rod as a (slightly flexible) lever. Casting without landing the fly on the water is known as 'false casting', and may be used to pay out line, to dry a soaked fly, or to reposition a cast. Other casts are the roll cast, the single- or double-haul, the tuck cast, and the side- or curve-cast. Dropping the fly onto the water and its subsequent movement on or beneath the surface is one of fly fishing's most difficult aspects; the angler is attempting to cast in such a way that the line lands smoothly on the water and the fly appears as natural as possible. At a certain point, if a fish does not strike, depending upon the action of the fly in the wind or current, the angler picks up the line to make another presentation. On the other hand, if a fish strikes, the angler pulls in line while raising the rod tip. This "sets" the hook in the fish's mouth. The fish is played either by hand, where the angler continues to hold the fly line in one hand to control the tension applied to the fish, or by reeling up any slack in the line and then using the hand to act as a drag on the reel. Most modern fly reels have an adjustable, mechanical drag system to control line tension during a fish's run. Beginners tend to point with the rod to where they want to throw, but the movement of the hand has to be a controlled speed-up and then come to an abrupt stop. The rod will then start to unfurl and the tip of the rod will reach a high speed in the required direction. The high speed of the rod tip toward the target gives the impulse to make the cast, the abrupt stop and retreat of the rod tip is essential for the formation of a loop. Experienced fishermen also improve the speed of the line leaving the rod tip by a technique called hauling, applying a quick fast pull with the hand holding the line. At the end of the cast when the line is stretched the line as a whole will still have speed and the fisherman can let some extra line through their fingers making a false throw, either forward or backward or to finish the cast and start fishing. There are a great number of special casts meant to evade problems like trees behind the angler (roll cast), the pulling of the line on the fly by the action of the stream, or to make the fly land more softly. Spey casting Spey casting is a casting technique used in fly fishing. Spey casting requires a longer, heavier two-handed fly rod, referred to as a "Spey rod".[27] Spey casting is essentially a large roll cast, developed on the Scottish River Spey where high banks do not allow space for the usual back cast. Spey casting is used for fishing large rivers for salmon and large trout such as steelhead and sea trout. Spey technique is also used in saltwater surf casting. All of these situations require the angler to cast larger flies long distances. The two-handed Spey technique allows more powerful casts and avoids obstacles on the shore by keeping most of the line in front of the angler. Fly fishing for trout Fly angler on the Firehole River, USA Fly fishing for trout is a very popular sport, which can be done using any of the various methods and any of the general types of flies. Many of the techniques and presentations of fly fishing were first developed in fishing for trout. There is a misconception that all fly fishing for trout is done on the surface of the water with "dry flies." In most places, especially heavily fished trout areas, success usually comes from fly fishing using flies called "nymphs" that are designed to drift close to the riverbed, also called "nymphing". A trout feeds below the water's surface nearly 90 percent of the time. Trout usually only come to the surface when there is a large bug hatch (when aquatic insects grow wings and leave the water to mate and lay eggs). There are exceptions to this rule, however, particularly during the summer months and on smaller mountain streams, when trout often feed on terrestrial insects such as ants, beetles and grasshoppers.[28] Techniques Fishing in cold water In order to deceive wary trout, or to reach deep runs where salmon may lie, the fly angler often needs to wade to the right casting position. He therefore requires sure footing and insulation from cold water, both provided by hip boots or chest-high waders. The latter are of two main types, one-piece "boot foot" waders and "stocking foot" waders, which require external boots. Formerly of latex rubber, "stocking foot" waders are now made of neoprene, usually 3 mm thick, which provide additional warmth. In the mid-20th century, American anglers developed felt boot soles for a better grip in rocky rivers: but felt is now prohibited in some US states, as a vector of fish and plant diseases that damage sport fisheries. Manufacturers now offer wading boots with special rubber treads or metal studs. Breathable Gore-Tex waders provide ventilation when hiking along the water, but do not provide flotation in the event of slipping or falling into deep water. In deep water streams, an inflatable personal flotation device (PFD), or a Type III Kayak fishing vest, adds a degree of safety. Some "catch and release" anglers flatten the barb of their hook. Such "barbless hooks" are much easier to remove from the fish (and from the angler, in the event of mishap). Many rivers with special regulations mandate that fishermen use barbless hooks in an effort to conserve a healthy fish population.[29] Dry fly trout fishing Main article: Dry fly fishing Dry fly fishing is done with line and flies that float, joined by a leader, usually made of fine polyamide monofilament line. The tapered leader is 3 to 5 meters long, thus nearly invisible where the fly is knotted, and the angler can replace the last meter of nylon as required. Unlike sinking fly (nymph) fishing, the "take" on dry flies is visible, explosive and exciting. While trout typically consume about 90% of their diet from below-water sources, the 10% of surface-level consumption by trout is more than enough to keep most anglers busy. Additionally, beginning fly anglers generally prefer dry fly fishing because of the relative ease of detecting a strike and the instant gratification of seeing a trout strike their fly. Nymph fishing may be more productive, but dry fly anglers soon become addicted to the surface strike. An Adams dry fly Dry flies may be "attractors", such as the Royal Wulff, or "natural imitators", such as the elk hair caddis, a caddisfly imitation[30] A beginner may wish to begin with a fly that is easy to see such as a Royal Wulff attractor or a mayfly imitation such as a parachute adams. The "parachute" on the parachute adams makes the fly land as softly as a natural on the water and has the added benefit of making the fly very visible from the surface. Being able to see the fly is especially helpful to the beginner. The fly should land softly, as if dropped onto the water, with the leader fully extended from the fly line. Due to rivers having faster and slower currents often running side by side, the fly can over take or be overtaken by the line, thus disturbing the fly's drift. Mending is a technique whereby one lifts and moves the part of the line that requires re-aligning with the fly's drift, thus extending the drag free drift. The mend can be upstream or down stream depending on the currents carrying the line or fly. To be effective, any mending of the fly line should not disturb the natural drift of the fly. Learning to mend is often much easier if the angler can see the fly.[31] Once a fish has been caught and landed, the fly may no longer float well. A fly can sometimes be dried and made to float again by "false" casting, casting the fly back and forth in the air. In some cases, the fly can be dried with a small piece of reusable absorbent towel, an amadou patch or chamois and after drying placed and shaken in a container full of fly "dressing"; a hydrophobic solution. A popular solution to a dry fly which refuses to float is simply to replace it with another, similar or identical fly until the original can fully dry, rotating through a set of flies. Fly fishing on the Gardner River in Yellowstone National Park, USA Dry fly fishing on small, clear-water streams can be especially productive if the angler stays as low to the ground and as far from the bank as possible, moving upstream with stealth. Trout tend to face upstream and most of their food is carried to them on the current. For this reason, the fish's attention is normally focused into the current; most anglers move and fish "into the current", fishing from a position downstream of the fish's suspected lie. Trout tend to strike their food at current "edges", where faster- and slower-moving waters mix. Obstructions to the stream flow, such as large rocks or nearby pools, provide a "low energy" environment where fish sit and wait for food without expending much energy. Casting upstream to the "edge" of the slower water, the angler can see the fly land and drift slowly back downstream. The challenge in stream fishing is placing the fly with deadly accuracy, within inches of a protective rock for instance, not long range casting. Done properly, the fly seems to be just floating along in the current with a "perfect drift" as if not connected to the fly line. The angler must remain vigilant for the "take" in order to be ready to raise the rod tip and set the hook. Nymphing for trout Trout tend mostly to feed underwater. When fishing deeper waters such as rivers or lakes, putting a fly down to the trout may be more successful than fishing on the surface, especially in the absence of any surface insect activity or hatch. The nymph itself can be weighted, as is the popular bead headed hare's ear nymph or bead headed pheasant tail nymph. Alternatively, the angler can use an attractor pattern such as a prince nymph. Weights can be added to the leader. Probably the best weight to use is twist on lead or other metal strips because it has a much less detrimental effect on the casting ability. A sinking tip fly line can also serve to sink the fly. A common nymphing and general overall fly fishing technique that even beginners can master is a "dead drift" or tight line fishing technique, casting directly across the river, letting the fly line drift downriver while keeping any slack out of the line. If the Nymph is drifting too fast, then you should perform an upstream mend. If the nymph is drifting too slowly, you should mend downstream. A beginner need simply to point the rod at the fly, lifting the rod in the event of a strike. This is a "downstream technique" where the angler moves in a downstream direction. More advanced techniques make use of a highly visible strike indicator attached to the leader above the sinking fly. In New Zealand, nymphing has become the dominant form of fishing in rivers such as the Tongariro River. A technique involving a high visibility indicator, and 2 nymphs tied in short succession (a weighted nymph and a 2nd often un-weighted nymph) means the chances of getting a fly into deeper water with a fly that still moves naturally increases. It is also possible to use standard sinking fly lines, especially if the current is strong and if it is difficult to get down to the correct level to catch the trout. Still water trout fishing A rainbow trout taken on an articulated leech pattern, Bristol Bay Region, Alaska Fishing for trout in lakes requires different tactics. A canoe, pontoon boat or a float tube allows an angler to cover a lot more water than waders. Trout may congregate in cooler water near an inflowing stream or an underwater spring and may be lured to bite on a streamer fly. An often successful tactic is to pull a streamer such as a woolly bugger using clear sinking line, behind the watercraft. The somewhat erratic motion of the oars or fins tends to give the streamer an enticing action. Trout also tend to "cruise" transitional areas (e.g. dropoffs, weed bed edges, subsurface river flow at inlets, etc.) Watching for cruising trout and casting well ahead of any visible fish is often successful. The legacy of Dr Howard Alexander Bell (1888-1974). Although he never wrote a word about fishing and shunned publicity, Dr Bell of Blagdon had the greatest formative influence of any man on the development of reservoir fishing in the first half of this century. In those days Blagdon was fished with spinners or with traditional sea-trout and low-water salmon flies. Fly fishing was carried out from boats and bank during the evening rise. Daytime fishing with the fly was thought to be of little use. Bell had read Skues and, following his example, used a marrow spoon to spoon out the trout he caught (one of his friends said, ‘He would spoon out his grandmother if he thought there was anything in her’). The stomach contents of the Blagdon trout were a revelation. There was nothing there but small larvae and pupae, among them the pupae of the famous black midge[32]. Dr Bell tied artificials to represent the insects that he found in the Blagdon trout, including bloodworms, midge and sedge pupae and beetles. His flies were quite small, 10s, 12s and sometimes 14s. He might have a Worm Fly on a single hook on the point, a Grenadier (caddis pupa) on the middle dropper and a Buzzer (midge pupa) on the top. All his dressings were plain and simple. Nevertheless in the 1920s and 30s he set the scene and pointed the way in which imitative patterns of underwater insects were to develop as one of the major techniques of reservoir trout fishing[33]. Playing trout Once hooked, a small trout can be easily retrieved "on the reel" or by simply pulling in the fly line with the reel hand while pinching the line between the rod handle and the index finger of the rod hand. It is important to keep the rod tip high, allowing the bend of the rod to absorb the force of the fish's struggles against the line. Larger trout will often take line in powerful runs before they can be landed. Unlike spin fishing where the line is already on the reel, playing a large fish with fly line and a fly reel can present a special challenge. Usually, when a fish is hooked, there will be extra fly line coiled between the reel and the index finger of the rod hand. The challenge is to reel up the loose fly line onto the reel without breaking off a large fish (or getting the line wrapped up around the rod handle, one's foot, a stick or anything else in the way). With experience, really large trout can be put on the reel simply by applying light pressure on the outgoing line using the fisher's fingers. Once the extra line is on the reel, an angler can use the reel's drag system to tire the fish. It is important to use heavier tippet material if it won't spook the fish. The reason why this is important is an exhausted fish can easily die if released too soon. Heavier tippet material enables the angler to land the fish while not over exhausting it. Releasing trout Main article: Catch and release Releasing wild trout helps preserve the quality of a fishery. Trout are more delicate than most fish and require careful handling. When a trout has been caught but the hook is still embedded, wet your hands before handling the fish. Dry hands stick to the adhesive slime coating the fish and can pull off its scales. It is preferred for the fish to remain in the water when removing the hook, but holding the trout out of the water will not be lethal, provided the hook is removed quickly and the trout is returned immediately. Small trout caught on a barb-less hook can be released simply by: grasping the eyelet of the fly, and rotating the eyelet toward the bend (the U-bend). This pulls the point backwards, back through the way it entered. Push the eyelet directly toward the bend until the point is removed from the fish. Large trout can be grasped gently and forceps can be used to grip the bend and push backwards, away from the direction the hook currently points. If necessary, squirming trout can be held on their backs. This often subdues the fish and provides enough time to remove the hook. Once the hook has been removed, return the trout into the water. Support the trout until it stabilizes. This includes holding the fish in water deep enough to submerge its gills. After long fights, it may be necessary to manually move water past its gills. This can be done either by holding the trout in moving water with its head facing upstream, or, in calm water, moving the trout backwards and forwards repeatedly. Once stabilized, the trout will swim off on its own. If released prematurely, the trout, not having enough energy to move, will sink to the bottom of the river and suffocate. Take however long is necessary to revive a trout. Saltwater flyfishing A red drum caught on a fly rod, Louisiana, USA Saltwater flyfishing is typically done with heavier tackle than that which is used for freshwater trout fishing, both to handle the larger, more powerful fish, and to accommodate the casting of larger and heavier flies. Salt water fly fishing typically employs the use of wet flies resembling baitfish, crabs, shrimp and other forage. However, saltwater fish can also be caught with poppers and other surface lure similar to those used for freshwater bass fishing, though much larger. Saltwater species sought and caught with fly tackle include: bonefish, redfish or red drum, permit, snook, spotted sea trout, tuna, dorado (mahi-mahi), sailfish, tarpon, striped bass, salmon, giant trevally and marlin. Offshore saltwater species are usually attracted to the fly by "chumming" with small baitfish, or "teasing" the fish to the boat by trolling a large hookless lure (Billfish are most often caught using this latter method). Many saltwater species, particularly large, fast and powerful fish, are not easily slowed down by "palming" the hand on the reel. Instead, a purpose-made saltwater reel for these species must have a powerful drag system. Furthermore, saltwater reels purpose-made for larger fish must be larger, heavier, and corrosion-resistant; a typical high-quality saltwater reel costs 500.00 USD or more. Corrosion-resistant equipment is key to durability in all types of saltwater fishing, regardless of the size and power of the target species. Saltwater Fly Fishing in Louisiana Saltwater fly fishing is most often done from a boat, either a shallow draft flat boat is used to pursue species such as bonefish, redfish, permit and tarpon in shallow waters, or from larger offshore boats for pursuing sailfish, tuna, dorado, marlin and other pelagics and may be done from shore, such as wading flats for bonefish or redfish or surf fishing for striped bass and other assorted fish. Typically, most trout fly fisherman need to practice new skills to catch saltwater fish on a fly rod. Ocean fish are usually harder to catch. They can be extremely spooky, and much larger. Trout fisherman need to practice with at least an 8 weight fly rod and accurately cast the line 30–90 feet if they are going to have success—particularly in the flat areas fishing for bonefish, redfish, permit, tarpon, jacks and more. Hooks for saltwater flies must also be extremely durable and corrosion resistant. Most saltwater hooks are made of stainless steel, but the strongest (though less corrosion resistant) hooks are of high-carbon steel. Typically, these hooks vary from size #8 to #2 for bonefish and smaller nearshore species, to size #3/0 to #5/0 for the larger offshore species. Tackle Main article: Fly fishing tackle A variety of fly reels on display at a fly fishing show Fly fishing tackle comprises the fishing tackle or equipment typically used by fly anglers. Fly fishing tackle includes: A wide variety of Fly rods of different weights, lengths and material are used to present artificial flies to target species of fish as well as fight and land fish being caught. A wide variety of Fly reels are used to store fly line and provide a braking mechanism (drag) for fighting heavy or fast moving fish. A wide variety of general use and specialized fly lines are used to cast artificial flies under a wide variety of fresh and saltwater conditions. Terminal tackle is used to connect the artificial fly to the fly line and allow the appropriate presentation of the fly to the fish. There are a wide variety of accessories—tools, gadgets, clothing and apparel used by the fly angler for maintenance and preparation of tackle, dealing the fish being caught as well as personal comfort and safety while fly fishing. Includes fly boxes used to store and carry artificial flies. Fly rods are typically between 1.8 m (6 ft) long in freshwater fishing and up to 4.5 m (15 ft) long for two-handed fishing for salmon or steelhead, or in tenkara fishing in small streams. The average rod for fresh and salt water is around 9 feet (2.7 m) in length and weighs from 3 –5 ounces, though a recent trend has been to lighter, shorter rods for fishing smaller streams. Another trend is to longer rods for small streams. The choice of rod lengths and line weights used varies according to local conditions, types of flies being cast, and/or personal preference. When actively fishing, the angler may want to keep the fly line lightly pressed against the rod handle with the index finger of the casting arm. The free arm is used to pull line from the reel or to retrieve line from the water. If a fish strikes, the angler can pinch the line with the index finger against the rod handle and lift the rod tip, setting the hook. Artificial flies Green Highlander, a classic salmon fly Main article: Artificial fly Further information: Fly tying Reservoir nymph patterns devised by Dr Bell of Wrington In broadest terms, flies are categorised as either imitative or attractive. Imitative flies resemble natural food items. Attractive flies trigger instinctive strikes by employing a range of characteristics that do not necessarily mimic prey items. Flies can be fished floating on the surface (dry flies), partially submerged (emergers), or below the surface (nymphs, streamers, and wet flies). A dry fly is typically thought to represent an insect landing on, falling on (terrestrials), or emerging from, the water's surface as might a grasshopper, dragonfly, mayfly, ant, beetle, stonefly or caddisfly. Other surface flies include poppers and hair bugs that might resemble mice, frogs, etc. Sub-surface flies are designed to resemble a wide variety of prey including aquatic insect larvae, nymphs and pupae, baitfish, crayfish, leeches, worms, etc. Wet flies, known as streamers, are generally thought to imitate minnows, leeches or scuds. Throughout history, artificial flies constructed of furs, feathers, and threads bound on a hook have been created by anglers to imitate fish prey. The first known mention of an artificial fly was in 200AD in Macedonia. Most early examples of artificial flies imitated common aquatic insects and baitfish. Today, artificial flies are tied with a wide variety of natural and synthetic materials (like mylar and rubber) to represent all manner of potential freshwater and saltwater fish prey to include aquatic and terrestrial insects, crustaceans, worms, baitfish, vegetation, flesh, spawn, small reptiles, amphibians, mammals and birds, etc. Knots Further information: Category:Fishing knots A few knots have become more or less standard for attaching the various parts of the fly lines and backing, etc., together. A detailed discussion of most of these knots is available in any good book on fly fishing. Some of the knots that are in most every fly angler's arsenal are: the improved clinch knot which is commonly used to attach the fly to the leader, the overhand slip knot or arbor knot which is used to attach the backing to the spool, the albright knot which can be used to attach the fly line to the backing. A loop can also be put in fly line backing using a bimini twist.[34] Often, a loop is added to the business end of the fly line to facilitate the connection to the leader. This loop may take one of several forms. It may be formed by creating a loop in the end of the fly line itself or by adding a braided loop or a loop of monofilament nylon (as in Gray's Loop). Alternatively, a single length of monofilament nylon, or fluorocarbon, may be tied to the end of the fly line using a nail or tube knot or a needle knot. A loop can then be tied at the end of this monofilament butt length or butt section using a double surgeon's knot or a perfection loop, to which the tapered or untapered leader, also looped using a double surgeon's knot or a perfection loop, may in turn be connected via a loop to loop connection.[35] The use of loop to loop connections between the fly line and the leader provides a quick and convenient way to change or replace a tapered leader. Many commercially produced tapered leaders come with a pre-tied loop connection. Some traditionalists create their own tapered leaders using progressively smaller-diameter lengths of monofilament line tied together with the blood, barrel knot or "surgeons knot".

HOME A MAN'S LIFE STYLE & GROOMING HEALTH & SPORTS MANLY SKILLS MONEY & CAREER RELATIONSHIPS & FAMILY PODCAST SHOP MORE SEARCH Jeremy Anderberg | October 18, 2017 Last updated: May 28, 2018 Manly Skills, Outdoors How to Get Started With Fly Fishing vintage man fly fishing in river Fishing with a rod and line, and an artificial lightweight lure made to imitate fish prey — that is, fly fishing — was first recorded around the year 200. And while modern innovation has improved the quality and durability of the materials, the basics of the sport and pastime have remained largely the same. Attach a lure (or “fly”) to a line, cast it in the water, and see what happens. Growing up, I fished in a boat with my uncle every now and then, but didn’t take it up on my own beyond that. Ever since moving to Colorado 5 years ago, though, I’ve been intrigued by fly fishing. You see fishermen in nearly every stream you pass by, and our family often encounters them on the trails we traverse. It seems like such an elegant way to pass the time and settle your mind, while also fulfilling the ancient role of Provider. So over Labor Day, I finally decided to hire a guide and learn the ropes. Below, I’ll share those ropes with you: why you’d choose fly fishing over other methods, gear to look for, fly and casting basics, and finally some concrete tips on actually getting yourself started with this age-old pursuit. Keep in mind this is a guide for folks who have either never fly fished, or have only done so a small handful of times and with little knowledge. It’s for men who’ve wanted to get into fly fishing, but haven’t known where to begin. If that’s you, I hope this guide can point you in the right direction. Why Fly Fish? What Distinguishes It From Other Types of Fishing? “To go fishing is the chance to wash one’s soul with pure air, with the rush of the brook, or with the shimmer of sun on blue water. It brings meekness and inspiration from the decency of nature, charity toward tackle-makers, patience toward fish, a mockery of profits and egos, a quieting of hate, a rejoicing that you do not have to decide a darned thing until next week. And it is discipline in the equality of men — for all men are equal before fish.” —Herbert Hoover, avid fly fishermen While spin casting with a spinning reel is a great introduction to fishing, many anglers would argue fly fishing elevates this pastime into a real art. Why is this? What are the differences? When it comes to the practicalities, the differences are many. To name just a few, in fly fishing: the rods are lightweight and much longer the bait (or “fly”) is super lightweight, artificial, and meant to imitate food (rather than using live bait or heavy lures) the line itself is heavier, and is what provides the weight to cast, versus the bait or lure itself you’re typically fishing in moving water (and often in the water) vs. the still water of lakes you’re almost constantly in motion rather than just sitting on a boat waiting for a bobber to dip; your arms get a good workout Beyond the practical differences, fly fishing is often labeled as the purer form. It requires craftsmanship and true skill to cast your line, the flies themselves are works of art, and as we’ll see, you become a true master of the environment. When I asked my guide why fly fish, he grinned like the answer was obvious and said, “Why wouldn’t you?” With spinning reel fishing, the goal is often a combination of relaxation and volume — catching as many fish as you can while having a nice outing on a boat or sitting in a chair on the shoreline. It’s just easier. With fly fishing, it’s more of a challenge. Can you trick the fish into biting onto your fly/hook? Not only that, can you successfully get the fish hooked at the right moment, and tease it into your hands/net? Can you navigate the stream, and know exactly where to place (or “present”) your fly, so the fish are most likely to bite? All of this is why you see romantic stories (and even philosophy books!) about fly fishing; it’s just a more poetic and artful form of the sport. Now that we know the “why,” let’s get more into the “how.” What Kind of Gear Do You Need? fly fishing gear and clothing While you don’t need everything pictured above when you’re first starting with fly fishing, this gives you a general overview of the kinds of things you’ll likely eventually acquire and take with you as you get more into it. For a full description of each item pictured, click here. When you think of fishing, and especially getting started with it, you likely think of all the stuff you’ll need to be successful. When I first got to the fly fishing shop and my guide was walking through all the gear we’d be taking advantage of, I was a little bit intimidated. There were multiple types and weights of line used, a case full of flies (ranging in size from a pinky nail to finger-length), gel to coat and waterproof the fly, tools and cutters for knot-tying and knot-untangling, not to mention waders, vests, and other clothing essentials. I think my guide saw my wide eyes, because he then said, “Really, you don’t need this much stuff to start. Grab a pole, some line, and some flies, throw it in the water, and see what happens.” He then told me the story of a kid in town he knew who would tie some line to a stick, tie on a fly, and drop it in the water — and he’d catch some fish to boot. Like with anything, when you embrace fly fishing you’ll likely end up with plenty of specialized gear, but you don’t need all that when you’re first starting out. Flies assortment of fly fishing flies lures Source Fly fishing gets its name from the bait that is used: artificial “flies” made to imitate what the fish are eating — bugs usually (like various types of . . . you guessed it, flies!), but sometimes even small rodents and other creatures. There are numerous types and sizes of flies — dry flies, nymphs, streamers — and what you use will depend on the fish you’re trying to catch and your setting. If the fish aren’t biting, you’ll often change out a fly and try to intuit what they might be after that day or season. This is why fly fishermen are often amateur ichthyologists (fish scientists) and entomologists (insect scientists). They know types of fish, what those fish eat in what season, what the bugs look like at different times of the year, etc. My guide’s biological knowledge after years of fishing was truly astounding. improved clinch knot fly fishing how-to diagram Source Once you can determine the right fly to use, there are a couple different acceptable knots for attaching that fly to your line, but the “improved clinch knot” seems to a favorite among a lot of experts. Check out this guide to not only that knot, but a handful of others used in fly fishing as well. diy homemade fishing fly lure A great closeup of a homemade fly. You can see the colored thread carefully wrapped about the hook, with feathers and hairs attached to create that bug-like look. Once you explore fly fishing, you’ll likely hear about folks who are “fly tying.” This is not a term for tying your fly to your line (as I initially and very naively thought), but rather a term for making your own flies rather than buying them. You’d do this to possibly save money (flies are easy to lose in trees or to rowdy fish), but also for the art of it. Flies truly are works of art, created with various materials like beads, foams, animal hairs, and much more. The beginner angler will not be fly tying; there are literally books written on the craft, and it requires a whole other set of tools and skills. This is something to look into after you’ve gotten the hang of the fishing itself. Casting and Catching The GIF above is from an Orvis instructional video. They have dozens of fly fishing videos for you to peruse. Once you have your gear and fly all set, it’s time to cast. When you watch seasoned fly fishermen in action on the stream, it’s like seeing art in motion. The way the arm moves, followed by the line and fly, so delicately placed on the water exactly where it’s wanted. Let me tell ya, that’s not what it looks like for the rank beginner. So here’s the scoop on fly casting: find someone to teach you. That’s truly the key. I could try to describe in text and illustrations how it happens, but that’s just not going to work. For this article, I actually researched the viability of putting together an illustrated guide on casting. But when I saw other guides that were out there and folks trying to describe it, I actually got more confused than when I was with my guide and trying it out with a rod in hand. There are too many types of casting, too many subtle motions and arm movements, and too many ways to make mistakes for me to try to relate that all to you here on a website. Of all the projects and skills I’ve written about for the Art of Manliness, this is the one that most needs to be learned in the flesh, either from a friend or family member who fishes, or from an expert who you’ve paid to help guide you along. The same goes for hooking and ultimately catching the fish. There’s a whole terminology that goes into casting and catching: Presentation Monofilament Strike Indicator Setting the hook Leader Tippet Riffle And this is just a small sample. You don’t want to be wading into those waters on your own — literally or metaphorically. So, how does the beginner actually go about getting started? Let’s take a look at that next. Tips for Getting Started: A Linear Progression Take a class. Chances are high that no matter where you live, some outfitter is offering a class on fly fishing. Be it a sporting goods store, a dedicated fly fishing shop, or even a community college, there are a lot of places putting on free (or low-cost) classes to learn the art. Orvis is a great place to look — they offer free classes in 42 states. They tend to start with a lecture portion on what I’ve covered above (but more in-depth), followed by hands-on instruction about lines, knots, flies, and casting. Depending on the shop, they’ll also have next-level classes, which sometimes include practicing in a stocked pond. man casting fly into east river colorado fly fishing Casting a line into the East River near Crested Butte, CO. I had a great experience with Almont Anglers; give ’em a shout if you’re in the area! Hire a guide. After you’ve taken a class or two, hire yourself a guide to take you on a half-day or full-day outing on the water. (If, that is, you don’t have an experienced friend or family member willing to take you and show you the ropes.) You can only learn so much in a classroom setting, even if there is some hands-on instruction involved. There’s nothing like being in the stream and seeing what a seasoned vet does in regards to which flies to use, where to cast, how he troubleshoots things, etc. I would recommend going in that order of taking a class first before hiring a guide. I did not do that, and about half of our half-day together was spent teaching me the ropes and practicing in a pond, which likely could have all been accomplished beforehand. A guide can be expensive — look to spend $150-$500 depending on your location, and whether you’re doing a full-day or half-day outing. Makes for a great gift to save up for if that’s a little out of reach. Practice tying your knots and casting. While not on the water, you can practice a few things at home. First, work on your knots; lines and flies (which are often tiny) need tying together, and it’s only with plenty of practice that you can do so deftly and efficiently. My guide could rig up a fly in less than 30 seconds, while I was fumbling with what felt like sausage fingers for a couple minutes before getting it just right. That doesn’t seem like much time, but when you’re out in the river, it adds up. Plus, if you’re fumbling with your fly in the water, dropping it means losing a couple bucks right then and there. Along with the guide listed above in the “Flies” section, Orvis also has a good encyclopedia of knots that one might use while fly fishing. (They truly are a gold mine of fly fishing info and instruction.) You can also practice casting at home, though it’s admittedly a little tougher because you need adequate room to do it. If your driveway or backyard is long enough, start there. If you don’t have room at home, go to a large park, or even a lake to practice your casting, with actual fishing being a secondary pursuit to your practice efforts. Start in lakes. While fly fishing is generally pictured as taking place in streams, plenty of fishermen practice their craft in lakes. Especially here in Colorado, it’s rather common to see guys (and gals) wading into cold mountain lakes. For the beginner, that’s going to be the easier route to go for one main reason: it’s just easier to keep an eye on your fly when the water is still. When fly fishing, there’s no bobber or super obvious jump on the line to cue you into a fish being hooked. Rather, you have to carefully watch your fly and line, and tug up when you see or feel slight movement in order to hook the fish (called “setting the hook”). In a flowing river or creek, when your fly and line is drifting and undulating with the current, it’s really hard to tell if that gentle tug on the line is a fish, or just a rock, or even the tug of the water itself. Start in lakes to really get the hang of things. Prepare to practice. A lot. I asked my guide about how long it took him to really master all this stuff, and he said it happens in phases. First you get good at casting and tying your knots, then you get good at noticing when a fish has shown interest in your fly, then you get good at setting the hook, then you get good at successfully reeling in and nabbing your fish, and finally once you have all that stuff taken care of, you can pay attention to the science of the fish and bugs, and know how to read the water and your environs. So, be prepared to try a lot, and fail a lot, before getting to a point of truly being comfortable in the water. Previous Post Next Post Daily Weekly Daily Weekly aom-podcast-big-button new Random Post Podcast Man Knowledge RECOMMENDED FOR YOU Men's Complaints About Women 50 Years Ago | The Art of Manliness Men's Complaints About Women 50 Years Ago | The Art of Manliness www.artofmanliness.com The Archetypes of Manliness | The Art of Manliness The Archetypes of Manliness | The Art of Manliness www.artofmanliness.com How to REALLY Avoid Living a Life of Quiet Desperation | The Art of Manliness How to REALLY Avoid Living a Life of Quiet Desperation | The Art of Manliness www.artofmanliness.com Becoming Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resilience | The Art of Manliness Becoming Antifragile: Beyond "Sissy" Resilience | The Art of Manliness www.artofmanliness.com Life Lessons From Atticus Finch | The Art of Manliness Life Lessons From Atticus Finch | The Art of Manliness www.artofmanliness.com AddThis CONTACT ADVERTISE LEGAL COMMENT POLICY The Art of Manliness Copyright © 2018 All Rights Reserved Built with iThemes Builder on WordPress by Screen Four A Man’s Life Dress & Grooming Manly Skills Relationships & Family Health & Sports Shop More Strenuouslife 1.9K SHARES 1.9K SHARES Focus Retriever 

Free 2-Day Shipping on Orders Over $50 My Account Chat 1-800-409-4502 Search gear & clothing Gearheads New Arrivals Brands Activities Women Men Kids Sale Take 15% Off Your First Order! Join our email list and save. Discount applied in cart. ex: joe@gmail.com Exclusions apply. See details. Photo Credit: Re Wikstrom Comment Share Top POSTED BYCurtis Jensen Most Popular Love Your Puffy: How To Care For Your Down Jacket How To Build Your First Trad Rack Canyoneering 101: Getting Started What Is A Plus Bike, And Is It For You? How To Choose A Backpacking Pack Fly Fishing 101: An Intro to Flies posted on April 21, 2014 Fishing flies are bait designed to imitate insects, invertebrates, baitfish, crustaceans, small animals, and other fish fodder. Traditionally, flies were “tied” with natural materials like feathers, thread, and animal fur or hair. Now, a range of synthetic and natural materials are used, sometimes on the same fly. Flies fall into roughly five categories: dry flies, wet flies, streamers, poppers, and saltwater flies. dryflieslayout2 Dry Flies Dry flies are fished on or at the surface of water and typically imitate adult or emerging insects like mayflies, caddisflies, stoneflies, midges, grasshoppers, and damselflies. Flies are tied in patterns, general recipes for specific types of imitations. Dry flies are thought by some (especially those in the Walton tradition) to be as good as it gets in fly fishing because the fish’s take is visual, requiring accurate casting and delicate presentation. Most good dry fly fishing requires a set of very specific conditions, conditions which don’t always materialize. But when conditions are right, say a hatch of adult Blue Wing Olive mayflies coming off a western trout stream on an overcast day in early spring, the fishing can be electric. Medium- to slow-action rods put dry flies on the water more delicately than faster actions, and so a growing number of dry-fly purists prefer bamboo rods. wetflieslayout1 Wet Flies Wet flies are fished below the surface, and are tied to imitate things like pupal- and nymph-stage aquatic insects, scuds (freshwater shrimp), fish eggs, worms, and crayfish. ‘Nymphing‘ is a type of trout fishing using wet flies suspended in moving water, with weight added to sink the rig to the fish’s feeding depth. The strike happens below the water’s surface, so the fly fisher must see (more like sense) the strike by watching for line movement at the surface or fish flashing below the surface. Some nymph rigs use strike indicators (flyspeak for ‘bobbers’), made of yarn, foam, or plastic, to help the fly fisher see the strike. Czech Nymphing or high-sticking uses weight suspended below the nymphs, with the fly fisher raising the rod tip as the line passes down current to keep the drifting rig relatively straight and in the feeding lane. Casting nymph rigs is not usually graceful; because of added weight and strike indicators, the traditional backcast becomes more of a chuck-and-duck lob. Trout spend most of their time feeding underwater, so, graceful or not, nymphing is often the most effective technique for cold-water species, especially when conditions are off for dry fly fishing. One-handed rods 9 feet or longer make for easier mends (adjustments to the drift of a nymph rig by lifting the line in the current). Streamers Streamers are larger wet flies tied to imitate baitfish, leeches, crayfish, and other small animals. Streamers are typically fished like lures; the fly fisher retrieves or strips in the lure to imitate prey. Fish hit streamers hard; strikes with streamers tend to be territorial or predatory, and usually violent. Think big browns ripping up deer hair mice patterns after dark. Doesn’t get much more fun than that. Streamers are fished with one- or two-handed rods, and can be effective for essentially any type of fish in almost any condition. Even in the most technical dry-fly fishing, most fish will give a well-presented streamer a good look, especially larger, predatory fish. BCRE_120531-0004 Poppers Poppers are blunt- or scoop-headed flies fished on the surface of water with quick strips and twitches, imitating wounded baitfish, frogs, mice, and other small prey animals. Poppers were borrowed directly from the baitcasting crowd—bass and warm-water species love these flies. Largemouth bass are known for their explosive takes on poppers—the boil looks like a toilet flushing. Saltwater Flies Saltwater flies are any flies used to fish for marine species of fish, and as such span a huge range of sizes and shapes. Most saltwater flies are wet flies tied to imitate crabs, shrimp, and baitfish. Saltwater patterns borrow heavily from streamers and poppers, though are typically much larger than their freshwater counterparts. Within these five basic types of flies, there are several different types of patterns and thousands of pattern variations. The type of fly you choose will depend on the type of fish you’re after, the season, the region, and the water. Related Fly Fishing 101: An Intro to Techniques How to Choose a Fly Rod How to Choose a Fly Reel Shop Fly Fishing Flies Fly Fishing Gear & Apparel flyfishing101-flies_large 1Comments Here's what the community has to say. John S. John S. July 2, 2014 Love that BC is now selling fly fishing gear. This article in particular is a great intro for people who are just starting out and looking to get involved. I would add that if you are new to the game, get a fast-action 9ft 5wt rod. You can do 95% of your freshwater fishing with a 9' 5wt. (1) Need Help? Talk to our Gearheads 24/7 about your needs. Call: 1.800.409.4502 Stay In The Know Sign Up For Backcountry News, Sales And Deals Put A Goat On It Helmet, bumper, you name it. Put a goat on it. Send Me A Sticker Give a Friend $10, Get $10 Refer Your Friends Gift Certificates e-Gift Certificate Classic Gift Card Popular Pages Home Resources Create a Wedding Registry Returns Order Status Sale Item Policy Sales Tax Policy Terms of Use Privacy Policy International Shipping Policy Learning Resources Gift Card Terms & Conditions About Backcountry About Backcountry Press Releases Group Sales Land Your Dream Job Affiliate Program Site Map What's Wrong with this Page? Download the Backcountry App . © Backcountry.com – All Rights Reserved Backcountry.com 

Find A Store My Account Bass Pro Shops Logo Cart Customer Service Bass Pro Shops CLUB Gift Cards Stores & Sale Flyers All Search Suggested site content and search history menu Search Shop Departments 1Source – News & Tips Stores Boats & ATVs Resorts & Restaurants FISHING NEWS & TIPS BASS CATFISH CRAPPIE EXERCISE & WORKOUTS FISH & WATER CONSERVATION FISH RECIPES FISHING FISHING EVENTS FISHING GEAR FISHING INFORMATION FISHING KNOTS: HOW TO TIE FISHING ROD & REEL REPAIR FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS FLY FISHING FLY TYING ICE FISHING INTERNATIONAL FISHING MUSKIE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER TARPON TAXIDERMY TROUT WALLEYE VIDEOS BASS CATFISH COOKING FISH CRAPPIE FISHING KNOTS FISHING PRODUCTS FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS & EVENTS FLY FISHING GENERAL FISHING ICE FISHING MUSKIE NATURE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER SNOOK STURGEON TROUT WALLEYE BRAGGIN' BOARD BASS CATFISH COOKING FISH CRAPPIE FISHING KNOTS FISHING PRODUCTS FISHING TACKLE FISHING TOURNAMENTS & EVENTS FLY FISHING GENERAL FISHING ICE FISHING MUSKIE NATURE PANFISH PEACOCK BASS PIKE POND MANAGEMENT SALMON SALTWATER SNOOK STURGEON TROUT WALLEYE FISHING MAPS PLACES TO FISH & BOAT MEMBER LOGINMEMBER LOGIN REGISTER BOATING NEWS & TIPS BOAT MAINTENANCE BOAT RIGGING BOATING INFORMATION CANOEING KAYAKING VIDEOS BOAT ACCESSORIES BOAT MAINTENANCE BOATING EVENTS BOATING INFORMATION BOATING SAFETY TIPS CANOE KAYAKING MY BOAT WATER SPORTS BRAGGN' BOARD BOAT ACCESSORIES BOAT MAINTENANCE BOATING EVENTS BOATING INFORMATION BOATING SAFETY TIPS CANOE KAYAKING MY BOAT WATER SPORTS HUNTING NEWS & TIPS ALL HUNTING ARCHERY BEAR BIG GAME BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING DEER DOVE DUCK ELK EXERCISE & WORKOUTS FIREARMS GAME PROCESSING GAME RECIPES GOOSE GROUSE HABITAT & WILDLIFE CONSERVATION HABITATS & FOOD PLOTS HUNTING DOGS HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION PHEASANT PREDATOR QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY TURKEY UPLAND HUNTING VARMINT WATERFOWL GEAR & TECHNIQUE WILD HOGS & BOAR VIDEOS ARCHERY ARCHERY TRICK SHOTS BEAR BIG GAME BIRD BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING COOKING WILD GAME DEER DUCK ELK GATOR GOOSE GROUSE HUNTING DOG HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION LAND / HABITAT MANAGEMENT PHEASANT PREDATOR PRONGHORN QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY HUNTING GAME TURKEY TURKEY ROOST BY CABELA'S WILD HOG / BOAR BRAGGIN' BOARD ARCHERY ARCHERY TRICK SHOTS BEAR BIG GAME BIRD BOWFISHING BOWHUNTING COOKING WILD GAME DEER DUCK ELK GATOR GOOSE GROUSE HUNTING DOG HUNTING EVENTS HUNTING GEAR HUNTING INFORMATION LAND / HABITAT MANAGEMENT PHEASANT PREDATOR PRONGHORN QUAIL SHOOTING SHOOTING SPORT CLAYS SMALL GAME TAXIDERMY HUNTING GAME TURKEY TURKEY ROOST BY CABELA'S WILD HOG / BOAR DEER NATION VIDEO PREP GEAR HUNT NEWS CAMPING NEWS & TIPS BACKPACKING BIRD WATCHING CAMPING DESTINATIONS CAMPING EQUIPMENT CAMPING INFORMATION CAVING EXERCISE & WORKOUTS HIKING OUTDOOR COOKING OUTDOOR EVENTS OUTDOOR GEAR OUTDOOR INFORMATION RV CAMPING ROPE KNOT LIBRARY SURVIVAL INFORMATION WHITEWATER VIDEOS CAMP COOKING CAMPING OUTDOOR OUTDOOR EVENTS BRAGGIN' BOARD CAMP COOKING CAMPING OUTDOOR OUTDOOR EVENTS COMMUNITY NEWS & TIPS VIDEOS BRAGGIN' BOARD MEMBER AREA FORUM BASS PRO NEWS COOK WITH CABELA'S Search... Search 1Source... SEARCH Advanced Search + A Simple Guide to Choosing Your First Fly Fishing Outfit Posted by Bass Pro Shops 1Source June 27, 2017 Published in News & Tips > Fishing > Fly Fishing My Favorites 1 0 4618 Comment Bass Pro Shops 1Source expert Whether you're new to fly fishing or just want to know more about fly fishing this guide will help you get started in selecting the basic collection of fishing accessories including the right fly fishing gear, selecting flies, leaders, fly line, fly rod and reel. So before you buy, check out these tips. fly fishing-troutAnother Way to Fish Fly angling can seem intimidating until you understand that it’s just another way to fish. The difference between fly tackle and conventional fishing gear is how it delivers the lure to the target: Conventional Fishing Outfits: cast a lure of a given weight, and the line is primarily for getting it back (or the fish to the boat). Fly Outfits: cast a fly line of a given weight, and the lure (often weighing practically nothing), is carried to the target by the line. Good casters can literally deliver a feather over a hundred feet with amazing accuracy. As with conventional gear, there is a “size” range of equipment for handling everything from the smallest to the biggest fish (and flies). You must first decide what type of fish you want to catch. Most people start with a medium duty outfit in a #5 or #6 weight size. (We’ll get back to “weight”.) A #5 weight outfit is great for pursuing trout, bluegill, and small-to-medium size bass. If you are immediately targeting redfish, pike, or heftier bass, a #8 weight outfit is a better choice. Outfits range from nearly impractical ultralight #1 weights, to specialized #15 weight setups for billfish and tuna. Most of the world lives between #4 and #9. Lines, rods, and many reels are labeled by weight to assure a perfect match. fly fishing-shop fly rod Fly rods are fishing rods built specifically for fly-fishing and are similar to any fishing rod in many ways, but also very different. source globalflyfisher.com How to Choose a Fly Rod Like conventional rods, fly rodsvary in price. The most important differences are in the material the blank is made with. The cheapest fly rods use inexpensive fiberglass, and tend to have a very soft action. The price increases with the use of better fiberglass, glass/graphite composites, and then graphites ranging from less expensive lower-modulus material to expensive high-modulus aerospace materials. (Modulus is a measure of a fiber’s strength in relation to its weight and mass.) Other factors that add to the price of a rod include: More and better guides Fancier reel seats, using exotic wood and machined metal instead of plastic High-quality cork Rod sock and tube Research, development, tooling costs, and labor Brand recognition Rfly fisherod actions range from slow (softer), to fast (stiffer), and are a matter of personal preference. The most important thing is making sure the line matches the rod. The length and line weight are printed on the rod. “What is a five weight?”—Fly rod, reel, and line “weights” 3 and 4 Line Weight: Perfect for the light-tackle enthusiast. Best with small flies for panfish and trout at short range. The ultimate for sensitivity and delicate fly presentation. 5 and 6 Line Weight: The most versatile line weights. Compatible with floating or sinking lines, dry flies, or bass bugs. A 5 weight is best for trout and panfish only. To add bass, small steelhead, and salmon to your quarry, a 6 weight is the right choice. 7 and 8 Line Weight: A pleasure to cast at medium and long range. These line weights work with floating or sinking lines and are best for large flies and large fish—bass, pike, salmon, and inshore saltwater species. “How long should my fly rod be?” 7–7-1/2 ft. Fly Rod Length: Available in lighter line weights to maximize accuracy and sensitivity at short range. Great for fishing tight cover, spring creeks, small streams, and ponds. 8 ft. Fly Rod Length: Maximum accuracy for short- and middle-range casting. Best for small or medium rivers, and ponds. A good choice when casting space is confined. 8-1/2 ft. Fly Rod Length: A versatile length, at home on all sizes of rivers as well as still water. Increased accuracy for middle and longrange casting. Also effective at short range. 9 ft. Fly Rod Length: Maximum overall line control. Effectively casts all distances. Best for medium and large rivers, from float tubes, boats, or anywhere casting space is unobstructed. fly reel Fly reels have five major design components: an external frame for endurance, a reel foot for easy attachment to the fly rod, an arbor for line storage, dispensing, and retrieval, an internal drag system to help an angler maintain fighting pressure. How to Select Your Fly Reel Fly reels serve a different role than conventional reels. Mostly they serve to store unused line. Usually, a workable amount of line is stripped from the reel, and managed by hand while fishing. Fly anglers retrieve their lures by hand-stripping them in. A fly reel is not used for fishing out a cast, i.e. casting and retrieving. In most cases, including big game fly fishing, the reel has a 1:1 gear ratio. The least expensive fly reels are made of plastic, and while OK to start with, are not very durable. Diecast metal reels are the next step up in price and ruggedness. The highest-quality reels are machined from bar stock aluminum. Reels ascend in price due to other factors: Corrosion-resistant hard anodized finish Extensive finishing, inside and out Use of high-quality gears and bearings Sophisticated drag systems Research, development, tooling costs, and labor Brand recognition When angling for trout, the drag need only offer light but smooth resistance to protect the light leaders used. A smooth click and pawl system works fine here, however more and more trout-sized reels are offering disk drags. Whichever you choose, the key is “smooth”. For longer running fish on heavier leaders, like steelhead, bonefish, etc., the drag becomes more critical, and disk drags become the preferred design. Nonetheless, “smooth” and reliable are the 2 critical factors. At this level (8 weight on up), you might consider spending more on your reel than your rod. How to Pick the Right Fly Line fly line taperYour fly fishing line has to match your rod. If your rod is a 5 weight, you must have a 5 weight line. Line weight is quantified by the weight of the front 30 feet of fly line. The front 30 feet of a 6 weight line weighs slightly more than a 5 weight, and so on. The flex of a rod is designed to cast a certain weight line. As with conventional rods, trying to throw more weight or less weight than what the rod is designed for just doesn’t work well. Heavier lines will carry out heavier flies, and do better in wind. Bass buggers prefer 8–9 weight outfits for this reason. Regardless of how a line is marketed, line boxes are always labeled (coded) with their taper, weight, and whether they float or sink. “WF5F” describes a weight forward taper, 5-weight floater. At this time weight forward taper lines are the most common, followed by double tapers. Even when fishing with nymphs and other submerged flies you will use a floating line most of the time. maxima leader flyfishing Maximum Leader Wheel How to Pick the Right Fly Leader The fly leader is your connection between the fly line and your fly. Most often it is monofilament, and tapered from a thicker butt section on the line end, to a thinner tip which is tied to the fly. Length of leaders will vary, with the most common sizes being 7-1/2 to 9 feet. There are various ways to attach the leader to the fly line. The simplest and most efficient connection is a Nail Knot, which is most easily tied with a tool. Other connections include braided loops and nylon connectors. When leader packages are coded with a number like “5X”, that refers to the diameter of the thin tip of the leader. Fortunately the packaging will also give the pound test of the tip section, which is more practical for new fly fishers. egg flyAbout Flies & Matching the Hatch This is a very broad subject. A lot of trout flies are meant to look like insects, hence the term “fly.” Actually, the reference applies to any phony food item with a hook in it that has a good chance of ending up in a fish’s mouth, and can be delivered with fly tackle. We are talking imitation eggs, baitfish, insects, plankton, crustaceans, etc., and any part thereof. nymph flySome floating models that look like adult bugs are referred to as “dry flies.” There are other subsurface insect designs that are classified as “wet flies” or “fish nymphs.” At its simplest, “matching the hatch” is finding out what the fish are eating, and then digging through your fly box for something the right size and shape. Advantages to Buying a Matched Fly Fishing Outfit fly outfit kit Fly Fishing Rod and Reel Outfit with Accessories White River Fly Shops® has taken much of the guesswork out of shopping for an outfit by offering matched outfits at a savings over individually purchased components. 1 arrow pointTip: Shop fly fishing outfits at basspro.com 1 arrow pointTip: Wright & McGill Plunge Fly Fishing Rod and Reel Outfit With Accessories Selecting a Basic Collection of Fly Fishing Accessories fly accessoriesAs you’ve guessed, there are various spare parts, gadgets, tools, and substances that will make your fly angling more productive. Fortunately most fly fishing accessories inexpensive, and a fly fishing vest has enough pockets for you to organize them all. A basic fly fishing collection to start would include: 2–3 sizes of fly fishing leader material (tippet) nippers like the Dr. Slick Offset Nipper with Hook sharpener for trimming mono knot tying tool like the Tie-Fast Knot Tyer for changing leaders a box of flies forceps like the White River Fly Shop stainless steel forceps for removing small fishing hooks strike indicators flyfishingTrout fishers can add the following: fly fishing strike indicators split shot selector like the Spring Creek Shot Assortment fly flotant like the Gink - Dry Fly Floatant shop fly fishingGetting Fishing Tips, Answering Questions & Buying Fly Equipment At your local Bass Pro Shops, the staff of White River Fly Shops® can be of great assistance when making your equipment and fly selections, and in answering your questions. Fortunately, there are a lot of great fly fishing instructional videos and DVDs available to help you master fly casting, knot tying, and even fishing techniques. We highly recommend you make the most of these instructional materials. In the long run, your introduction to fly fishing and your time on the water will be a lot more fun if you do. Tagged underFly Fishing Tips Fly Tying Tips Fishing Gear How To Guide Read 4618 times Last modified on February 9, 2018 Bass Pro Shops 1Source expert Our goal is to provide outdoor industry content that is informational, tells where-to and how-to, presents views and opinions from outdoor writers as well as fishing and hunting professionals including many recreational and industry experts. Bass Pro 1Source shares its fishing, boating, hunting and camping videos, blogs, tips, and news and talk forum with anyone interested in the great outdoors, wildlife and habitat conservation. More about Bass Pro Shops 1Source » LATEST FROM BASS PRO SHOPS 1SOURCE Monday September 24, 2018, 6:00 am Pheasants and our National Forests Featured on Bass Pro Shops Outdoor World Radio Saturday September 15, 2018, 6:00 am Celebrating National Hunting and Fishing Day on Bass Pro Shops Outdoor World Radio RELATED ARTICLES Friday July 6, 2018, 6:30 am Many Factors Make Fly Fishing for Panfish Appealing Sunday July 31, 2016, 7:00 am Have Some Fun & Fly Fish for Bluegills, The Seasons, The Patterns, The Presentation You must be signed in to post comments on Bass Pro Shops 1Source. Don't have an account? Please join Bass Pro Shops 1Source. COMMENTS Sort by Latest First Sort by Oldest First No comments found back to top Tournament Fishing Rewards Bass Pro Shops 1Source Newsletter Sign-up Tournament Fishing Rewards Bass Pro Shops 1Source Newsletter Sign-up FISHING TOP SELLERSSHOPLOCATE A STORE 1406110826553 - Z-Man Finesse TRD Z-Man Finesse TRD $4.29 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100088679 - G. Loomis E6X Casting Rod G. Loomis E6X Casting Rod $199.99 100179633 - Shimano Curado DC Baitcast Reel Shimano Curado DC Baitcast Reel $249.99 10210181 - Bass Pro Shops XPS Tungsten Worm Weights Bass Pro Shops XPS Tungsten Worm Weights $7.29 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 96636 - Strike King Rage Tail Craw Soft Bait Lures Strike King Rage Tail Craw Soft Bait Lures $5.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 58909 - Gary Yamamoto 5'' Senko Gary Yamamoto 5'' Senko $8.79 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 1304170611422 - Bass Pro Shops XPS KVD Signature Series 100% Fl… Bass Pro Shops XPS KVD Signature Series 100% Fl… $99.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100054092 - Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Cas… Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Cas… $119.99 95625 - Bass Pro Shops 5-3/8'' Stik-O Worm Bass Pro Shops 5-3/8'' Stik-O Worm $9.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 7506 - Zoom 5'' Super Fluke Zoom 5'' Super Fluke $3.69 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100055513 - Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Bai… Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Bai… $209.98 169269 - Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Bai… Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite 2.0 Bai… $119.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 1208310516498 - Bass Pro Shops Excel Monofilament Line - Jumbo … Bass Pro Shops Excel Monofilament Line - Jumbo … $11.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 44283 - PowerPro 300 Yards Braided Spectra Fiber Micro … PowerPro 300 Yards Braided Spectra Fiber Micro … $62.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10211203 - Z-Man The Original ChatterBait Z-Man The Original ChatterBait $5.49 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100055830 - Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite/CarbonL… Bass Pro Shops Johnny Morris CarbonLite/CarbonL… $169.98 53661 - Gamakatsu EWG Worm Hook Gamakatsu EWG Worm Hook $20.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 161658 - Bass Pro Shops Pro Qualifier 2 Baitcast Reel Bass Pro Shops Pro Qualifier 2 Baitcast Reel $99.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10209674 - Strike King KVD Rattling Square Bill Crankbaits Strike King KVD Rattling Square Bill Crankbaits $13.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 100026989 - Abu Garcia Revo X Baitcast Reel Abu Garcia Revo X Baitcast Reel $99.99 168574 - Daiwa Tatula CT Baitcast Reel Daiwa Tatula CT Baitcast Reel $129.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 10209675 - Strike King KVD Square Bill Silent Crankbaits Strike King KVD Square Bill Silent Crankbaits $10.99 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ 14071007465716 - YUM Dinger YUM Dinger $3.49 ★★★★★ ☆☆☆☆☆ Terms of Use Privacy Policy Contact Bass Pro 1Source Receive Our Newsletters Bass Pro 1Source Sitemap Bass Pro Shops Customer Service Associate Customer Service 1‑800‑BASSPRO (1‑800‑227‑7776) Email Live Chat FAQs Returns Shipping Information Privacy Policy Accessibility Policy Support ID: ? Recalls/Terms/Disclosures Recall Information Gift Card Terms & Conditions CLUB and Outdoor Rewards FAQ Terms of Use/Community Guidelines CA TSCA Disclosure Sign Up for Bass Pro Shops Email Bass jumping out of phone graphic Email & Text Sign Up Text BASS to 40745 to sign up for mobile alerts. (Message & data rates may apply.) Sign Up for Email Resources Bass Pro 1Source — News & Tips Catalog Request Online Catalogs Rod & Reel Repair Embroidery Services Sizing Information Wildlife Creations Site Index Store Locator Pin Select a Store State/Province City/Store Company Info Cabela's Boat Service Centers Stores Restaurants The Bass Pro Shops Story Our Passionate Founder & Conservationist Johnny Morris Conservation & Community Company News Wholesale Dealers & Tax Exempt Organizations Career Centers Affiliate Program Descriptive, typographic or photographic errors are subject to corrections. VeriSign Secure Site and BBB Accredited. All prices are in U.S. funds. All pages © 2006 – 2018 BPS Direct, L.L.C. All rights reserved. If you are using a screen reader and are having problems using this website, please call 1-800-227-7776 for assistance. VeriSign Secure Site and BBB Accredited Sumo Focus Retriever FacebookTwitterPinterestGoogle+EmailSumoMe

Get Licensed Learn To Fish & BoatWhere To Fish & BoatState Info How To Fish Saltwater Fishing Freshwater Fishing Fly Fishing Ice Fishing Boating How To Catch Fish How To Tie Fishing Knots Fishing Gear And Tackle View All When To Saltwater Fish Saltwater Bait And Lures Saltwater Fishing Tackle View All Best Freshwater Fishing When To Freshwater Fish Freshwater Bait And Lures View All Fly Fishing Basics Fly Fishing Flies Fly Fishing Gear View All Ice Fishing Basics Ice Fishing Gear Ice Fishing Techniques View All Boating Basics How To Boat Boating And Water Safety View All Fish Species Smallmouth Bass Coho Salmon Walleye View All Take Me Fishing Blog 5 International Fishing License Guidelines to Know Read Article What Native Fish Conservation Means For Anglers Read Article View Blog View All In Learn To Fish & Boat Select a state to find fishing and boating information: ALABAMA ALASKA ARIZONA ARKANSAS CALIFORNIA COLORADO CONNECTICUT DELAWARE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FLORIDA GEORGIA HAWAII IDAHO ILLINOIS INDIANA IOWA KANSAS KENTUCKY LOUISIANA MAINE MARYLAND MASSACHUSETTS MICHIGAN MINNESOTA MISSISSIPPI MISSOURI MONTANA NEBRASKA NEVADA NEW HAMPSHIRE NEW JERSEY NEW MEXICO NEW YORK NORTH CAROLINA NORTH DAKOTA OHIO OKLAHOMA OREGON PENNSYLVANIA RHODE ISLAND SOUTH CAROLINA SOUTH DAKOTA TENNESSEE TEXAS UTAH VERMONT VIRGINIA WASHINGTON WEST VIRGINIA WISCONSIN WYOMING GET A FISHING LICENSE Get started fishing today, purchase your fishing license online, check regulations and more. REGISTER A BOAT Register your boat today. Learn how to register your vessel, boating laws and more. CUSTOM SEARCH Home > Learn to Fish & Boat > Fly Fishing Fly Fishing Fly fishing is fun, relaxing and easy to learn. You can fly fish anywhere, from the shore of a lake or from a boat on the ocean waves. Get fly fishing tips about how to fly cast, choosing gear, where to fish and more. GET YOUR FISHING LICENSE REGISTER YOUR BOAT Dry Fly Fishing Tips to Use This Fall 8 DRY FLY FISHING TIPS TO USE THIS FALL READ MORE Different fly fishing hook sizes FLY FISHING HOOK SIZES: HOW DO YOU CHOOSE? READ MORE An angler fly fishing in toccoa river TOCCOA RIVER FLY FISHING TIPS READ MORE LEARN FLY FISHING BASICS To start fly fishing you need a fly rod, a line and some artificial flies. FLY FISHING BASICS reel ROLL CASTING Use the roll cast when there is no room behind. Practice this cast on the water. reel TYING FLIES Get fly fishing basics for tying flies specific to the type of fish you want to catch. reel FLY FISHING RODS Get fly fishing tips to learn how to select the best fly fishing rod for your next outing. FLY FISHING FLIES Learn more about the different sizes, colors and patterns of fishing flies. BEST FISHING FLIES STARTER FISHING FLIES AQUATIC INSECTS SEE ALL FLY FISHING GEAR In fly fishing, having the right gear increases your chances of success. FLY FISHING RODS FLY FISHING REELS FLY FISHING LINES SEE ALL FLY CASTING The more you practice your technique, the more of a master caster you’ll become. ROLL CASTING TWO STROKE CASTING TIGHT LOOP & OPEN LOOP SEE ALL PLACES TO BOAT AND FISH NEARBY VIEW MAP LICENSE FIRST. BONDING SECOND. Fishing is a great way to bond with your family. But remember, before you go you need to purchase your fishing license and check your state fishing regulations. GET LICENSED Subscribe to our Newsletter Email SIGN UP CORPORATE MEDIA CENTER DONATE GET A LICENSE REGISTER YOUR BOAT RECURSOS EN ESPAÑOL CONTACT US FAQ TERMS OF USE RBFF Vamos A Pescar Takemefishing.org ©2018 RBFF. Take Me Fishing™ is a trademark of the Recreational Boating & Fishing Foundation.All Rights Reserved Sport Fish Restoration

 Flying fish From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigationJump to search For other uses, see Flying fish (disambiguation). Not to be confused with Raining fish. Flying fish Temporal range: Eocene–Recent[1] PreЄЄOSDCPTJKPgN Sailfin flyingfish.jpg Sailfin flying-fish Parexocoetus brachypterus Scientific classification edit Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Actinopterygii Order: Beloniformes Suborder: Belonoidei Superfamily: Exocoetoidea Family: Exocoetidae Genera Cheilopogon Cypselurus Exocoetus Fodiator Hirundichthys Parexocoetus Prognichthys The Exocoetidae are a family of marine fish in the order Beloniformes class Actinopterygii. Fish of this family are known as flying fish. About 64 species are grouped in seven to nine genera. Flying fish can make powerful, self-propelled leaps out of water into air, where their long, wing-like fins enable gliding flight for considerable distances above the water's surface. This uncommon ability is a natural defence mechanism to evade predators. The oldest known fossil of a flying or gliding fish, Potanichthys xingyiensis, dates back to the Middle Triassic, 235–242 million years ago. However, this fossil is not related to modern flying fish, which evolved independently about 66 million years ago.[2][3] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Distribution and description 2.1 Flight measurements 3 Fishery and cuisine 4 Importance 4.1 Tobago 4.1.1 Maritime disputes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Etymology The term Exocoetidae is both the scientific name and the general name in Latin for a flying fish. The suffix -idae, common for indicating a family, follows the root of the Latin word exocoetus, a transliteration of the Ancient Greek name ἐξώκοιτος. This means literally "sleeping outside", from ἔξω "outside" and κοῖτος "bed", "resting place", verb root κει- "to lie down" (not "untruth"),[4] so named as flying fish were believed to leave the water to sleep ashore,[5] or due to flying fish flying and thus stranding themselves in boats. A different etymological approach is Ancient Greek ἔξω "outside" + κύτος "hull", which means not submerged in the water. Distribution and description Flying fish Flying fish taking off Flying fish live in all of the oceans, particularly in tropical and warm subtropical waters. They are commonly found in the epipelagic zone, the top layer of the ocean to a depth of about 200 m. It is often known as the "sunlight zone" because it is where most of the visible light exists. Nearly all primary production, or photosynthesis, happens in this zone.[6] Therefore, the vast majority of plants and animals inhabit this area and can vary from plankton to the sharks. Although the epipelagic zone is an exceptional area for variety in life, it also has its drawbacks. Due to the vast variety of organisms, high numbers of prey and predation relationships exist.[7] Small organisms such as the flying fish are targets for larger organisms. They especially have a hard time escaping predators and surviving until they can reproduce, resulting in their having a lower fitness.[7] Along with relationship difficulties, abiotic factors also play a part. Harsh ocean currents make it extremely difficult for small fish to survive in this habitat. Research suggests that difficult environmental factors in the flying fish's habitat have led to the evolution of modified fins.[8] As a result, flying fish have undergone natural selection in which species gain unique traits to better adapt to their environments. By becoming airborne, flying fish evade their predators. This increase of speed and maneuverability is a survival advantage to flying fish when compared to other species in their environment. It has also been proposed that becoming airborne is not solely a predator evasion technique, as flying fish have been observed jumping from the water in the absence of predators. Theories including energy saving and introduction to food-rich environments have also been suggested.[7] The flying fish has undergone morphological changes throughout its history, the first of which is fully broadened neural arches, which act as insertion sites for muscles, connective tissues, and ligaments in a fish’s skeleton. Fully broadened neural arches act as more stable and sturdier sites for these connections, creating a strong link between the vertebral column and cranium.[9] This ultimately allows a rigid and sturdy vertebral column (body) that is beneficial in flight. Having a rigid body during glided flight gives the flying fish aerodynamic advantages, increasing its speed and improving its aim.[9] Furthermore, flying fish have developed vertebral columns and ossified caudal complexes.[10] These features provide the majority of strength to the flying fish, allowing them to physically lift their bodies out of water and glide remarkable distances. These additions also reduce the flexibility of the flying fish, allowing them to perform powerful leaps without weakening midair.[10] At the end of a glide, they fold their pectoral fins to re-enter the sea, or drop their tails into the water to push against the water to lift for another glide, possibly changing direction.[11][12] The curved profile of the "wing" is comparable to the aerodynamic shape of a bird wing.[13] The fish is able to increase its time in the air by flying straight into or at an angle to the direction of updrafts created by a combination of air and ocean currents.[11][12] Species of genus Exocoetus have one pair of fins and streamlined bodies to optimize for speed, while Cypselurus spp. have flattened bodies and two pairs of fins, which maximize their time in the air. From 1900 to the 1930s, flying fish were studied as possible models used to develop airplanes.[12] The Exocoetidae feed mainly on plankton. Predators include dolphins, tuna, marlin, birds, squid, and porpoises.[12] Flight measurements In May 2008, a Japanese television crew (NHK) filmed a flying fish (dubbed "Icarfish") off the coast of Yakushima Island, Japan. The fish spent 45 seconds in flight.[14] The previous record was 42 seconds.[14] The flights of flying fish are typically around 50 m (160 ft),[15] though they can use updrafts at the leading edge of waves to cover distances up to 400 m (1,300 ft).[15][16] They can travel at speeds of more than 70 km/h (43 mph).[12] Maximum altitude is 6 m (20 ft) above the surface of the sea.[13] Flying fish often accidentally land on the decks of smaller vessels.[12][17][18] Fishery and cuisine Flying fish for sale in local fish market of Saint Martin's Island, Bangladesh Flying fish are commercially fished in Japan, Vietnam, and China by gillnetting, and in Indonesia and India by dipnetting.[12] Often in Japanese cuisine, the fish is preserved by drying to be used as fish stock for dashi broth. The roe of Cheilopogon agoo, or Japanese flying fish, is used to make some types of sushi, and is known as tobiko. It is also a staple in the diet of the Tao people of Orchid Island, Taiwan. Flying fish is part of the national dish of Barbados, cou-cou and flying fish. The taste is close to that of a sardine. In the Solomon Islands, the fish are caught while they are flying, using nets held from outrigger canoes. They are attracted to the light of torches. Fishing is done only when no moonlight is available. Importance Tobago Tobago is known as "the land of the flying fish", and the fish is one of the national symbols of the country. Once abundant, it migrated between the warm, coral-filled Atlantic Ocean surrounding the island of Barbados and the plankton-rich outflows of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. Just after the completion of the Bridgetown Harbor / Deep Water Harbor in Bridgetown, Barbados had an increase of ship visits, linking the island to the world. The overall health of the coral reefs surrounding Barbados suffered due to ship-based pollution. Additionally, Barbadian overfishing pushed them closer to the Orinoco delta, no longer returning to Barbados in large numbers. Today, the flying fish only migrate as far north as Tobago, around 120 nmi (220 km; 140 mi) southwest of Barbados. Despite the change, flying fish remain a coveted delicacy. Many aspects of Barbadian culture center around the flying fish; it is depicted on coins, as sculptures in fountains, in artwork, and as part of the official logo of the Barbados Tourism Authority. Additionally, the Barbadian coat of arms features a pelican and dolphinfish on either side of the shield, but the dolphin resembles a flying fish. Furthermore, actual artistic renditions and holograms of the flying fish are also present within the Barbadian passport. Maritime disputes Further information: Barbados v. Trinidad and Tobago In recent times, flying fish have also been gaining in popularity in other islands, fueling several maritime disputes. In 2006, the council of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea[19] fixed the maritime boundaries between Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago over the flying fish dispute, which gradually raised tensions between the neighbours.[20] The ruling stated both countries must preserve stocks for the future. Barbadian fishers still follow the flying fish southward. See also Flying and gliding animals Neuston Tradeoffs for locomotion in air and water References Fossilworks. "Exocoetidae". Oldest flying fish fossil found in China Nature, News, 31 October 2012. Xu, Guang-Hui; Li-Jun Zhao, Ke-Qin Gao and Fei-Xiang Wu (2012) A new stem-neopterygian fish from the Middle Triassic of China shows the earliest over-water gliding strategy of the vertebrates" Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, Published online before print October 31, 2012. doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.2261 Harper, Douglas. "exocet". Online Etymology Dictionary. Pliny's Natural History, vol. IX, 19) Fish, F. E. (1990). Wing Design And Scaling of Flying Fish With Regard To Flight Performance. Journal of Zoology, 221(3), 391-403. Davenport, J. (1994). How And Why Do Flying Fish Fly?. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 4(2), 184-214. Dasilao, J., & Yamaoka, K. (1998). Development of the Vertebral Column And Caudal Complex in a Flyingfish, Parexocoetus Mento Mento (Teleostei: Exocoetidae). Ichthyological Research, 45(3), 303-308. Dasilao, J., & Yamaoka, K. (1998). Development Of The Vertebral Column And Caudal Complex In A Flyingfish, Parexocoetus Mento Mento (Teleostei: Exocoetidae). Ichthyological Research, 45(3), 303-308. Dasilao, J. C., & Sasaki, K. (1998). Phylogeny Of The Flyingfish Family Exocoetidae (Teleostei, Beloniformes). Ichthyological Research, 45(4), 347-353. Fish, F. E. (1990). "Wing design and scaling of flying fish with regard to flight performance" (PDF). Journal of Zoology. 221 (3): 391–403. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1990.tb04009.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-20. Kutschera, U. (2005). "Predator-driven macroevolution in flyingfishes inferred from behavioural studies: historical controversies and a hypothesis" (PDF). Annals of the History and Philosophy of Biology. 10: 59–77. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-08-20. Fish, F. (1991). "On a fin and a prayer" (PDF). Scholars. 3 (1): 4–7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-11-02. "Fast flying fish glides by ferry". BBC News. May 20, 2008. Retrieved May 20, 2008. Ross Piper (2007), Extraordinary Animals: An Encyclopedia of Curious and Unusual Animals, Greenwood Press. Flying Fish, Exocoetidae National Geographic. Retrieved 10 August 2014. Joseph Banks (1997). The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Banks 1768–1771 (PDF). University of Sydney Library. Retrieved July 16, 2009. Moran. Churchill: Taken from the Diaries of Lord Moran. p. 819. "Barbados/Trinidad and Tobago". Permanent Court of Arbitration. April 11, 2006. Archived from the original on 2010-06-02. "Claims of Caribbean piracy as national symbol takes flight". The Sydney Morning Herald. December 18, 2004. External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Exocoetidae. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Flying-fish. Flying Fish, National Geographic Society vte Fish About fish Diversity Ethnoichthyology Evolution Diseases and parasites Fisheries Fishing Fish as food Fear of fish FishBase Fish kill Hypoxia in fish Ichthyology Striated frogfish Anatomy and physiology Fish anatomy Fish physiology Age determination Anguilliformity Bone dermal intramembranous ossification Cleithrum Chromatophore Fins dorsal fin Gill branchial arch gill raker gill slit pharyngeal arch pharyngeal slit pseudobranch Glossohyal Jaw hyomandibula pharyngeal jaw Leydig's organ Mauthner cell Meristics Operculum papillare Papilla Photophore Root effect Shark cartilage Scales ganoine Spiral valve Suckermouth Swim bladder physoclisti physostome Teeth pharyngeal teeth shark teeth Teleost leptins Digital Library Sensory systems Sensory systems in fish Ampullae of Lorenzini Barbel Hydrodynamic reception Electrocommunication Electroreception Jamming avoidance response Lateral line Otolith Passive electrolocation Capacity for pain Schreckstoff Surface wave detection Vision Weberian apparatus Reproduction Fish reproduction Bubble nest Clasper Egg case Fish development Ichthyoplankton Juvenile fish Life history theory Milt Mouthbrooder Polyandry in fish Pregnancy Roe Sequential hermaphroditism Spawning triggers Locomotion Fish locomotion Fin and flipper locomotion Amphibious fish Walking fish Flying fish Undulatory locomotion Tradeoffs for locomotion in air and water RoboTuna Other behaviour Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Bait ball Bottom feeders Cleaner fish Corallivory Diel vertical migration Electric fish Filter feeders Forage fish Migrating fish Paedophagy Predatory fish Salmon run Sardine run Scale eaters Schooling fish Sleep in fish Venomous fish Fish intelligence By habitat Cave Coastal Coldwater Coral reef Deep sea Demersal Euryhaline Freshwater Groundfish Pelagic Tropical Other types Bait Coarse Diversity Game Genetically modified Hallucinogenic Oily Poisonous Rough Whitefish Commercial Fish farming Carp Catfish Salmonids Tilapia Wild fisheries Predatory fish billfish mackerel salmon tuna Forage fish anchovy herring sardine sprats Demersal fish cod flatfish pollock Major groups Jawless fish hagfish lampreys Cartilaginous fish chimaeras sharks rays Bony fish spiny-finned fleshy-finned Lists Aquarium life Blind fish Fish common names Fish families Glossary of ichthyology Large fish Threatened rays sharks Prehistoric fish Category more lists... Category Category Portal Portal WikiProject WikiProject Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q183686 Wikispecies: Exocoetidae ADW: Exocoetidae EoL: 8245 Fossilworks: 266181 GBIF: 2968 IRMNG: 114845 ITIS: 165431 NBN: NBNSYS0000160007 NCBI: 76072 NZOR: c91e2e89-b8da-4a7e-867a-639e3f7479ff uBio: 114118 WoRMS: 125452 Authority control Edit this at Wikidata GND: 4154627-1 NDL: 00576573 Categories: ExocoetidaeGliding animalsFish of OceaniaMarine fish of AfricaMarine fish of AsiaFish of HawaiiFish of JapanExtant Miocene first appearancesMiocene fishQuaternary fishBarbadian cuisine Navigation menu Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch Search Wikipedia Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Languages Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Русский Tagalog Tiếng Việt 中文 53 more Edit links This page was last edited on 16 October 2018, at 19:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki 

 Subscribe MENU A streamlined torpedo shape helps flying fish generate enough speed to break the water’s surface, and large, wing-like pectoral fins help get them airborne. PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYA MINAKUCHI, MINDEN PICTURES/NAT GEO IMAGE COLLECTION ANIMALSREFERENCE Flying Fish COMMON NAME: Flying Fish SCIENTIFIC NAME: Exocoetidae TYPE: Fish DIET: Omnivores GROUP NAME: School SIZE: Up to 18 in SIZE RELATIVE TO A TEACUP: Get photos, videos, and exclusive journalism about wildlife and pets, plus special offers. Enter your email By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to news, offers, and information from National Geographic Partners and our partners. Click here to visit our Privacy Policy. Easy unsubscribe links are provided in every email. ABOUT FLYING FISH Flying fish can be seen jumping out of warm ocean waters worldwide. Their streamlined torpedo shape helps them gather enough underwater speed to break the surface, and their large, wing-like pectoral fins get them airborne. Flying fish are thought to have evolved this remarkable gliding ability to escape predators, of which they have many. Their pursuers include mackerel, tuna, swordfish, marlin, and other larger fish. For their sustenance, flying fish feed on a variety of foods, including plankton. Characteristics There are at least 40 known species of flying fish. Beyond their useful pectoral fins, all have unevenly forked tails, with the lower lobe longer than the upper lobe. Many species have enlarged pelvic fins as well and are known as four-winged flying fish. Gliding Ability The process of taking flight, or gliding, begins by gaining great velocity underwater, about 37 miles per hour. Angling upward, the four-winged flying fish breaks the surface and begins to taxi by rapidly beating its tail while it is still beneath the surface. It then takes to the air, sometimes reaching heights over 4 feet and gliding long distances, up to 655 feet. Once it nears the surface again, it can flap its tail and taxi without fully returning to the water. Capable of continuing its flight in such a manner, flying fish have been recorded stretching out their flights with consecutive glides spanning distances up to 1,312 feet. Fishing Flying fish are attracted to light, like a number of sea creatures, and fishermen take advantage of this with substantial results. Canoes, filled with enough water to sustain fish, but not enough to allow them to propel themselves out, are affixed with a luring light at night to capture flying fish by the dozens. There is currently no protection status on these animals. READ MORE DID YOU KNOW? Flying fish can soar high enough that sailors often find them on the decks of their ships. These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. 1/7 To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL NEWTON, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY EMON JAMAN, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY L. ARTIOLA, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY MATIAS ALEXANDRO, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY GINETTE VACHON, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY L. ARTIOLA, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. To view a caption from the photographer, click on the credit below. PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBBIE LABANOWSKI, YOUR SHOT These photos were taken by Your Shot photographers. Join now to share your images, take part in story assignments, and get helpful feedback. SHARE TWEET EMAIL COPY MOST POPULAR ANIMALS African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagle Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Praying Mantis Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmese Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraffe Cheetah Red Fox Horse Gray Wolf African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagle Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Praying Mantis Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmese Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraffe Cheetah Red Fox Horse Gray Wolf African Elephant Polar Bear Giant Panda Bald Eagle Jaguar Komodo Dragon Bengal Tiger Praying Mantis Arctic Fox Jaguar Burmese Python Red Panda African Lion Koala King Cobra Giraffe Cheetah Red Fox Horse Gray Wolf SEE ALL ANIMAL FACTS & PICTURES Search animal... SEE ALL ANIMALS PHOTOS BY JOEL SARTORE, NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC PHOTO ARK PHOTO ARK The National Geographic Photo Ark is a multiyear project creating intimate portraits of every species in captivity to inspire people to help ensure their survival in the wild. Photo Ark founder Joel Sartore has photographed 8,000 species around the world, including many that face growing threats to their survival. Learn more about how to help protect these creatures. LEARN MORE LATEST IN ANIMALS ANIMALS PICTURE STORIES Painted wolves, struggling to survive, find a new food: baboons READ ANIMALS Human-caused extinctions have set mammals back… READ ANIMALS WILDLIFE WATCH How the world’s largest snake hunt hurts Southeast Asia's… WATCH ANIMALS See this year's best wildlife photos SEE PHOTOS MAGAZINE Dolphins have unique whistles for their friends, and more… READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN SCIENCE & INNOVATION SCIENCE & INNOVATION 'World’s oldest fossils’ may just be pretty rocks READ MAGAZINE Science seeks to unlock marijuana's secrets READ Wreckage of WWII-era warship U.S.S. Indianapolis found… READ SCIENCE & INNOVATION Did Vesuvius vaporize its victims? Get the facts. READ How Microsoft Billionaire Found Largest Sunken… READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENT PLANET OR PLASTIC? Microplastics found in 90 percent of table salt READ MAGAZINE Science seeks to unlock marijuana's secrets READ ENVIRONMENT This chemical turns polluted green lakes clear. Is it safe? READ ENVIRONMENT What a Gold Rush-era orchard could mean for the future of food READ ENVIRONMENT Bill Gates launches effort to help the world adapt to climate change READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN TRAVEL TRAVEL Visit Europe's most beautiful cemeteries READ PARTNER CONTENT Climb to the top of a rainforest tree canopy in Costa Rica READ PARTNER CONTENT Journey Across Canada by Train READ TRAVEL Go inside Frankenstein's castle READ PARTNER CONTENT Sights and bites: what to eat while touring San Diego, California READ LOAD MORE LATEST IN CULTURE & EXPLORATION MAGAZINE Science seeks to unlock marijuana's secrets READ Sunken World War II aircraft carrier found by deep-sea expedition READ HISTORY MAGAZINE Jaguars were the divine felines of the ancient Americas READ ENVIRONMENT A running list of how President Trump is changing… READ CULTURE & EXPLORATION Photos show how Saudi Arabia has changed over time READ LOAD MORE THE BEST OF NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC DELIVERED TO YOUR INBOX. Sign up for more inspiring photos, stories, and special offers from National Geographic. Enter your email By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to news, offers, and information from National Geographic Partners and our partners. Click here to visit our Privacy Policy. Easy unsubscribe links are provided in every email. COMPANY National Geographic Society Book a Trip Buy Photos Attend a Live Event Visit the Museum Explore Our Maps Genographic Shop the Store For Kids Your Shot ABOUT NAT GEO Contact Us About Us Advertise With Us Press Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR FAQs Ad Choices Terms of Service JOIN US Subscribe Sign In Jobs United States FOLLOW US Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic Society|Copyright © 2015-2018 National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved 

softschools.com Pre-K Kindergarten 1st Grade 2nd Grade 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5th Grade Middle School High School Phonics Fun Games Math Math Games Math Worksheets Algebra Language Arts Science Social Studies Literature Languages Themes Quizzes Timelines Login Home > Facts > Animal Facts > Flying fish Facts Flying fish Facts Flying fish Facts Flying fish is one of the most interesting types of fish due to its ability to glide through the air. There are 40 different species of flying fish that can be found in all oceans of the world. They prefer tropical and subtropical water of Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Ocean. Flying fish are especially abundant in the Caribbean Sea. Barbados was known as the "The land of flying fish" in the past. Flying fish are often hunted by fisherman. Luckily their number in the wild is still stable and they are not listed as endangered species. Interesting Flying fish Facts: Size of flying fish depends on the species. They are usually 7 to 12 inches long. Upper side of the body of flying fish is bluish-grey. Their belly is grayish-silver. Flying fish has forked tail. Lower piece of the tail is longer than upper piece. Pectoral fins of flying fish can be spread into wing-like shape. Certain species have pelvic fins shaped like wings also, and they look like they have two pairs of wings. Flying fish are shaped like torpedo. Their fins are closed when they swim to ensure faster movement through the water. Before it emerges above the water, flying fish accelerates toward the surface of the water with the speed of 37 miles per hour. When required speed is accomplished, flying fish jumps out of the water and spreads its wings. Flying fish can reach the height of 4 feet in the air, and glide distance of 655 feet before returning back to the water. Flying fish can travel distances of 1.312 feet without rest. This is important because it ensures quick escape from predators. Main predators of flying fish are marlin, tuna, swordfish, mackerel and humans. Flying fish swims in large schools (groups). This feature is especially appreciated by fishermen that can catch large number of fish when they bump into a single school. Flying fish are very sensitive and easily attracted by the light (fishermen use light to guide flying fish toward their ships). Despite that fact, flying fish hunts mainly during the night. Flying fish eats plankton, bacteria and other tiny marine creatures. Mating season of flying fish takes place when the ocean currents are the weakest. Depending on the ocean, it can be during the spring of autumn. Flying fish live in large groups and their number can exceed million individuals during the mating season. Females deposit large number of eggs near the surface of the water. Eggs are usually attached to the floating debris. Young flying fish have whiskers near the mouths, and they look like the underwater plants. This appearance ensures survival during the first few days of life, when the youngsters are the most vulnerable. Average lifespan of flying fish is around 5 years in the wild. Related Links: Facts Animal Facts Animals Facts <a href="http://www.softschools.com/facts/animals/flying_fish_facts/318/">Flying fish Facts</a> More Topics Handwriting Spanish Facts Examples Formulas Difference Between Inventions Literature Flashcards 2018 Calendar Online Calculators Multiplication Educational Videos Quizzes Flashcards Coloring Pages Links Link us Contact Us Privacy policy Terms of Use Search © 2005-2018 Softschools.com 

The National Wildlife Federation Contact Us Blog Shop Log In Search for... The National Wildlife Federation OUR WORK GET INVOLVED ABOUT US KIDS & FAMILY EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES MAGAZINES LATEST NEWS Donate Donate Flying Fish HOME EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES WILDLIFE GUIDE FISH FLYING FISH Flying Fish Flying Fish Family: Exocoetidae STATUS: NOT LISTED CLASSIFICATION: FISH DESCRIPTION Flying fish are ray-finned fish with highly modified pectoral fins. Despite their name, flying fish aren’t capable of powered flight. Instead they propel themselves out of the water at speeds of more than 35 miles (56 kilometers) an hour. Once in the air, their rigid “wings” allow them to glide for up to 650 feet (200 meters). The winglike pectoral fins are primarily for gliding—the fish hold the fins flat at their sides when swimming. Their streamlined bodies reduce drag when the fish are “flying.” Another interesting characteristic of the flying fish is its unevenly forked tail, which has a top lobe that’s shorter than the bottom lobe. Flying fish can be up to 18 inches (45 centimeters) long, but average 7 to 12 inches (17 to 30 centimeters). RANGE There are roughly 40 species of flying fish. Flying fish are tropical and temperate marine species that can be seen off both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the United States. They are also found in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. Open oceans provide a habitat for most flying fish, but some live instead on the outskirts of coral reefs. It’s thought that flying fish evolved a flying mechanism to escape from their many oceanic predators. Once in the air, though, they sometimes become food for birds. Young flying fish may have filaments protruding from their lower jaws that camouflage them as plant blossoms. DIET Flying fish eat a variety of foods, but plankton make up a large part of their diet. They sometimes eat small crustaceans as well. LIFE HISTORY Spawning takes place in the open ocean, near the water’s surface. A female deposits eggs, which are attached by sticky filaments to seaweed and floating debris. Newly hatched flying fish have whiskers near their mouths, which disguises them as plants, thus protecting them from predators. A flying fish lives for an average of five years. CONSERVATION Flying fish populations are stable. These fish are commercially fished in some places. Flying fish are attracted to light and are relatively easy to catch because of their tendency to leap into small, well-lit boats. FUN FACT Some flying fish also have winglike pelvic fins that help them to glide. These species are called four-winged flying fish. SOURCES Discovery National Geographic Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute Get Involved DONATE TODAY SIGN A PETITION DONATE MONTHLY NEARBY EVENTS Shop the National Wildlife Federation’s Related Items Ranger Rick 1 year Subscription Ranger Rick 1 year Subscription $19.95 each Celebration Sponsorships Celebration Sponsorships $10.00-$150.00 each Wildlife Adoption Gift Card Wildlife Adoption Gift Card $50.00 Gift Card Get the Latest Updates SIGN UP NOW What's Trending a boy looking up through binoculars JOIN THE NATURE PACK! Place your order today for the themed box that delivers everything you need to create family memories while discovering nature and wildlife. Read More Richard Branson in front of Virgin Altantic airplane SOARING SUSTAINABILITY: HISTORIC FLIGHT ON LOW-CARBON JET FUEL Get a glimpse inside the first commercial flight—powered by Virgin Atlantic—to use advanced waste-based biofuels. Read More beach dunes REBUILDING STRONGER The National Wildlife Federation outlines 12 recommendations to protect America from hurricanes and worsening extreme storms. Read More red wolf CALL TO ACTION FOR RED WOLVES: “WE CANNOT TURN OUR BACK ON A NATIVE SPECIES” There are fewer than 40 red wolves left in the wild—freely roaming the forests and marshes of eastern North Carolina. Read More Happening Near You You don't have to travel far to join us for an event. Attend an upcoming event with one of our regional centers or affiliates. LEARN MORERegional Centers and Affiliates ABOUT US CONTACT US MAGAZINES BLOG ACTION FUND CAREERS National Wildlife Federation The National Wildlife Federation Uniting all Americans to ensure wildlife thrive in a rapidly changing world PO Box 1583, Merrifield, VA 22116-1583 800.822.9919 Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Visit our Facebook Ranger Rick Meet Ranger Rick Our beloved wildlife ambassador has been creating lifelong connections with nature for generations. Learn More National Wildlife Federation is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization Terms & DisclosuresSite MapPrivacy PolicyLanguage Powered by Google TranslateTranslate

HOME FRESHWATER FISH SALTWATER FISH JOURNAL Fish Laboratory Flying Fish - Facts flying fish.jpg The World of Flying Fish One of the most unusual species of fish in the ocean is the Exocoetidae, of flying fish. This animal is unlike any other fish in that it is able to literally fly through the air. In certain parts of the world, the flying fish is a special part of the culture through heritage, providing food, and through culture. The flying fish generally grows up to 18 inches in maturity and never weighs more than two pounds. The modern flying fish is thought to have evolved some 66 million years ago according to fossils. There are 40 known species of flying fish in the world. The ability to fly is thought to have evolved from the need to escape predators in the sea. Swordfish, Tuna, and Marlin are known to feed on flying fish. The flying fish has unusually large pectoral fins and a forked tail. To launch itself into the air, the fish angles itself at a trajectory to reach the surface, beating its tail up to 70 times per second. As it breaks the surface of the water, it spreads its large pectoral fins and glides. As it loses momentum, it puts its fins down and re-enters the water. Sometimes it can just touch the surface of the water and regain altitude for another glide. The typical length of the flight is about 150 feet and lasts 15-20 seconds. In 2008, a Japanese film crew just happened to catch a flying fish catch flight for 45 seconds which is the longest recorded flight. Flying fish have been reported found on decks of ships which indicate that they are capable of reaching altitudes of up to 20 feet. Most flights are typically four to five feet in height. Flying fish are found in all oceans but are especially common in warmer, tropical climates. They feed on smaller fish and plankton. While their numbers are not known, they are thought to be relatively common and without risk of extinction. They are attracted to light, which is why they are found at the surfaces of the water. This also is a downfall as they are easily caught by fishing nets. Flying fish are heavily fished in Asia and are a delicacy in Taiwan and Japanese cuisine. Because of the unusual flying characteristics, the flying fish is revered in several cultures all over the world. The island of Barbados is known as “the land of the flying fish.” At one time, flying fish were very common here because of an unusual amount of plankton in the waters here. Until recently, when boats from other nearby islands began trade with Barbados, they were a staple of society. But as more boats came to the island, overfishing occurred and the flying fish were pushed farther out into the ocean. Today, there are laws in place that protect the flying fish from being overfished as island nations near Barbados respect and honor an agreement to allow enough fish to survive to ensure future generations of the animal. Imagery of the flying fish are found on Barbados currency, in the national seal, and on passports. And it is considered a staple of the diet in Barbados. Similar to Barbados, Taiwan and other Asian cultures place high value on the flying fish. Not only is the fish considered a delicacy and heavily fished in Asian waters, but it is also revered in culture with festivals and celebrations. Taiwan calls their island the home of the flying fish. Each year in Spring, the fish migrate into the warmer waters of Taiwan. In March, a giant festival is held to celebrate the arrival of the fish. However, the Taiwanese culture acknowledges to species of flying fish. The first to arrive is the species Cheilopogon Unicolor. The Taiwan fishermen have a unique way to catch these fish. They will go out into the water at night in small boats similar to canoes and wave fire torches above the water. As we know, the fish are attracted to light and will take flight at the sight of the fire. And, unwittingly, they take flight into the boats where they are returned to the island to be shared in many delicacies of the region. However, the main species of flying fish doesn’t appear until April when the Cheilopogon Cyanopterus makes its appearance in Taiwanese waters. The people believe that this species is the “soul and chief” of the flying fish and, therefore, most revered. So important is the flying fish to the Taiwan culture that even the calendar seasons revolve around the migration of the flying fish. The spring season is called ‘rajun,' or the flying fish season. Summer and autumn are known as 'teteka,’ or when the flying fish season ends. Winter is called ‘aminon,’ or when there are no flying fish. There is a cluster of small islands of the main island of Taiwan where the flying fish takes an especially important role. Each season, they have a flying fish festival where the young men of the islands perform ceremonial rituals in homage to the fish. The flying fish are considered a gift from Heaven and are cooked in a special way. No salt is used while cooking the fish. Instead, they soak the fish in seawater and then hang it up to dry in the sun. Then they store the fish in special homemade containers to last during the seasons of no flying fish. Another tradition unique to this area of Taiwan is that men are only to eat one species of flying fish while the women eat another. The elderly have a third species just for them. It is stated in their culture that if an elderly person eats a species reserved for a younger man or woman, they will fall ill. While the flying fish may be seen only as a curiosity to many, it is seen as a way of life to others. This unique fish with the ability to soar above its predators has a special place in many cultures seemingly worlds apart. As cruises become more popular as a means of vacation and travel, more people are taking notice of these little animals jumping out of the water. Take heed the next time you see one, and pay a little respect to one of nature’s most unusual gifts. Newer / Older Comments (4) Newest First Subscribe via e-mail Preview Post Comment… Patrick 2 years ago · 0 Likes Coolest fish hands down julian 2 years ago · 1 Like ya mutha Alexis 2 years ago · 0 Likes lol Alexis 2 years ago · 0 Likes I think you should add who discovered it and when it was discovered. Search Fish Laboratory Newsletter Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates. Email Address SIGN UP We respect your privacy. Contact Us Copyright © 2017 Fish Laboratory Design by Fishora