Cell is a 2016 American science fiction horror film based on the 2006 novel of the same name by Stephen King. The film is directed by Tod Williams, produced by John Cusack, with a screenplay by King and Adam Alleca. The film stars John Cusack, Samuel L. Jackson, and Isabelle Fuhrman. The film was released on June 10, 2016 to video on demand, prior to a limited release scheduled for July 8, 2016. Cell is the second film adaptation of a King story to co-star Cusack and Jackson, after 1408 (2007).

The film was panned by critics upon its release; most criticized the film's acting and plot.

Clayton "Clay" Riddell (Cusack) is a disillusioned artist, whom a year earlier abandoned his wife, Sharon (Sarullo) and son, Johnny (Casto), in hopes of living his dream at publishing a graphic novel. At Boston International Airport, Riddell is attempting to board a flight in hopes of reconciling with his family. His cell phone battery dies and he's forced to use a pay phone to reconnect with Sharon. Suddenly an electronic signal is broadcast across mobile networks worldwide, cell phone users are instantly and dangerously re-programmed into rabid killers. Riddell manages to escape the chaos in the terminal, and is rescued by a group of survivors in a subway car. The train's driver Thomas "Tom" McCourt (Jackson) suggests abandoning the train and travelling through the tunnels, due to the power outage. Riddell agrees and, joined by a third man, attempts to escape the airport.

Near the tunnel's exit, their companion is stabbed to death by an infected man, later dubbed as "Phoners" and the two escape to the street above. Riddell leads Tom to his apartment to hide out and consider their options. That night the two are joined by Alice Maxwell (Fuhrman), a teenage neighbor of Riddell's who is in a blood soaked dress and confesses that she killed her mother in self-defense. The two take her in and decide to escape Boston.

Heading north through New England to find Sharon and Johnny, Riddell and the other two avoid the "Phoners" who have collectively ceased all violence to those infected, attacking only normal people. After acquiring weapons from a house, they encounter a single boy who is revealed to be a phoner. He is shot and killed, but a nearby flock chases the three to a nearby river. Hiding from the infected, they observe the flock (at sundown) emit mysterious signals from their mouth and then walk off as a group.
